WELCOME TO THE
WEDNESDAY MARCH 20TH TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR ELECTRONIC MEETING
OF THE INNOVATIVE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION.
THIS MEETING IS BEING HELD
ELECTRONICALLY BUT WE INTEND TO
CONDUCT IT SIMILARLY TO AN
IN-PERSON MEETING PUBLIC
COMMENT WILL BE VIA TELEPHONE
OR ZOOME ONLY TO SPEAK DURING
ANY OF THE PUBLIC COMMENT
OPPORTUNITIES PLEASE CALL TO
ZERO SIX THREE THREE SEVEN NINE
SEVEN TWO THREE AND ENTER
MEANING ID NUMBER NINE THREE
FOUR SIX THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO
NINE ZERO SEVEN OR JOIN THE
ZOOM LIKE THIS INFORMATION IS
ALSO AVAILABLE ON THE PUBLIC
AGENDA IN THE PUBLIC NOTICES
SECTION OF THE CITY WEBSITE AND
ON THE BROADCAST OF THIS
MEETING ON CHANNEL 16, RAYMOND
,IF YOU COULD CALL ROLL
PLEASE.
>> SURE THING.
AND AS A REMINDER PLEASE STAY
HERE AND FROM WHERE IT IS YOU
ARE CALLING IN FROM WHEN I SEE
YOUR NAME COMMISSIONER BOLAND
HERE IN ANN ARBOR COUNCIL
MEMBER BRIGS COMMISSIONER ROVEN
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR,
COMMISSIONER CAMPBELL HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR.
COMMISSIONER, HOW TO MACCHI
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR MISSIONER
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR AND GOING
TO GIVE HIM JUST A MOMENT
COMMISSIONER KEILLER
OH YES.
WE CAN HEAR YOU, LARRY.
OK, I DIDN'T KNOW IF YOU CALLED
ME YET OR NOT BUT I AM HERE
FROM ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN.
Q THANK YOU.
>> LET'S SEE COMMISSIONER LEE
.
>> COMMISSIONER CARPENTER,
YOU'RE FROM SUPERINTELLIGENT
COMMISSIONER RAMASWAMY
.
ALL RIGHT.
COMMISSIONER HESS HERE FROM ANN
ARBOR, MISSIONER HUTCHINSON
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR.
COMMISSIONER MONGKOL MARGOLIS,
ABSOLUTE LIEUTENANT MIKE
SCHERBA.
>> YOU'RE FROM TYRONNE TOWNSHIP
.
COMMISSIONER STUKA ABSENT.
ALL RIGHT.
WE DO HAVE QUORUM.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THERE ARE TWO ITEMS ON THE
AGENDA APPROVAL OF THE AGENDA
AND APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES.
ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS TO
THE CONSENT AGENDA?
>> PETER JUST WANTED
INTERRUPTING.
THERE IS ONE WE WERE TRYING TO
JOIN THE RONNO I GUESS.
>> I'M SORRY.
YEAH, IT LOOKS LIKE HE IS ON
NOW SO CAN I GO AHEAD AND ASK
HIM AS WELL TEMBLORS.
THANK YOU FOR THAT.
>> NO BRIGGS'S JOINING AS WELL
MARY.
ALL RIGHT.
IS THERE A MOTION TO APPROVE
COUNCIL'S AGENDA AS PRESENTED
BY I MOVE TO BE SECONDED BY
LARRY ALL THOSE IN FAVOR OF THE
MOTION PLEASE SAY YES.
>> RAISE YOUR HAND.
>> YES.
THOSE OPPOSED TO THE MOTION SAY
NO OR RAISE YOUR HAND.
THE CONTENTS AGENDA IS APPROVED
BY PUBLIC COMMENT.
ALL THE COMMENTARY THIS IS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR PERSONS TO
SPEAK FOR UP TO THREE MINUTES
PLEASE TWO ZERO SIX THREE THREE
SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO THREE AND
ENTER MEETING I'D NUMBER NINE
THREE FOUR SIX THREE EIGHT FIVE
TWO NINE ZERO SEVEN OR CONNECT
WITH YOU THAT'S DESCRIBED ON
THE AGENDA CITY STAFF WAS
SELECT CALLERS THAT HAVE RAISED
A HAND ONE BY ONE USING THE
LAST THREE DIGITS OF YOUR PHONE
NUMBER OR THE PERSONS YOU MIGHT
NEED IN ORDER TO ELECTRONICALLY
RAISE YOUR HAND TO INDICATE
YOUR DESIRE TO SPEAK PLEASE
PRESS STAR ONE ON YOUR PHONE OR
SELECT
A RAISED HAND BUTTON.
DO YOU HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT THE HOST IS
ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK WHEN
SPEAKING PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET
AREA AND ANY TELEVISION OR
BACKGROUND SOUND SO THAT WE MAY
HEAR YOU CLEARLY.
RAYMOND, DO WE HAVE ANY MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC WHO WISH TO
SPEAK?
I'M NOT SEEING ANY RAISED HANDS
AT THE MOMENT.
JUST A MOMENT AND IF ANYBODY
WOULD LIKE TO DO SO.
>> ALL RIGHT.
I THINK WE CAN MOVE ON.
THANK YOU.
>> ALL RIGHT.
OF COURSE.
THANK YOU.
AS ALWAYS WITH NOTE THAT THERE
OF COURSE.
ARE FIVE EMAILS THAT WERE SENT
AS ALWAYS WITH NOTE THAT THERE
TO THE MACHINE.
ARE FIVE EMAILS THAT WERE SENT
SO TAKE A LOOK AT THOSE ARE
TO THE MACHINE.
INCLUDING ATTACHMENT ARE ARE
SO TAKE A LOOK AT THOSE ARE
PART OF THE PACKET YOU HAVE
INCLUDING ATTACHMENT ARE ARE
RECEIVED.
PART OF THE PACKET YOU HAVE
ALL RIGHT.
RECEIVED.
FIRST ITEM OF BUSINESS PAGE
ALL RIGHT.
AVENUE PARKING REMOVAL PAGE
FIRST ITEM OF BUSINESS PAGE
AVENUE IS GETTING NEW SIDEWALKS
AVENUE PARKING REMOVAL PAGE
AND WILL BE RESURFACED.
AVENUE IS GETTING NEW SIDEWALKS
PART OF THIS PROPOSAL INCLUDES
AND WILL BE RESURFACED.
REMOVAL OF PARKING ON ONE SIDE
PART OF THIS PROPOSAL INCLUDES
OF PAGE BETWEEN ASH AND HER
REMOVAL OF PARKING ON ONE SIDE
PAST WHICH WOULD REQUIRE
OF PAGE BETWEEN ASH AND HER
COUNCIL ACTION.
PAST WHICH WOULD REQUIRE
SO JANE ELLEN WILL WALK US
COUNCIL ACTION.
THROUGH THE PROPOSAL AND THEN
SO JANE ELLEN WILL WALK US
SEEK OUR RECOMMENDATION.
THROUGH THE PROPOSAL AND THEN
GOOD EVENING EVERYONE.
SEEK OUR RECOMMENDATION.
WOULD YOU LIKE ME TO SHARE MY
GOOD EVENING EVERYONE.
SCREEN OF THE DEPARTURE
WOULD YOU LIKE ME TO SHARE MY
OF DARIO?
SCREEN OF THE DEPARTURE
IT SEEMS LIKE THAT WOULD
OF DARIO?
PROBABLY BE HELPFUL.
IT SEEMS LIKE THAT WOULD
OK,
NOW EVERYONE CAN SEE THIS
NORTH IS TO YOUR RIGHT SO THIS
IS ON PAGE AVENUE MATT THIS IS
ATTRITE HERE.
SO WE DECIDED BASED ON THE
EXISTING UTILITIES WE HAD TO
DECIDE FIRST OF ALL WHICH SIDE
OF THE ROAD WE WANTED TO PLACE
THE SIDEWALK AND FOR A LOT
OF CONFLICTS TO BE AVOIDED WE
ENDED UP PUTTING IT ON THE EAST
SIDE.
WE HAD TWO TOURS WITH RESIDENTS
TO WALK THE AREA.
WE BROUGHT OUT OUR TAPE
MEASURES AND TALKED ABOUT ANY
IMPACTS TO THEIR DRIVEWAY OR
LANDSCAPING OR FENCES AND AFTER
MEETINGS AND EMAILS WITH
FEEDBACK WE DECIDED TO RELOCATE
HER TO LET PEOPLE TO LIKE
MAINTAIN SOME OF THE TREES AND
LANDSCAPING THAT WAS THERE AND
ALSO THE RIGHT AWAY I PAID ONLY
40 FEET AND CURRENTLY THE ROAD
WAS TWENTY THREE FEET WIDE FROM
GUTTER BAND TO THAT OPEN AND
NOW IT'S GOING TO BE TWENTY
FEET WIDE FROM THE FACE OF HER
TO FACE THE CURB SO TWO
VEHICLES CAN PASS AND WE WILL
THEN HAVE TO GET RID OF THE
PARKING ON THE EAST SIDE OF THE
STREET WE DID CONSULT WITH FIRE
MARSHAL AND RAYMOND HAAS AND
REALIZE THAT IF SOMEONE IS
PARKED ON ONE SIDE THERE THERE
MIGHT ONLY BE 13 FEET AVAILABLE
.
SO IT'LL BE A YIELD CONDITION
AT THAT TIME.
SO IT GOES HERE.
WE'RE GOING TO PUT IT ON BOTH
SIDES OF THE STREET BECAUSE
THEY HAD EXISTING SIDEWALK TO
ASH.
SO THAT JUST MADE SENSE TO
FINISH THAT BLOCK THAT WAY WITH
SIDEWALK ON BOTH SIDES AND THEN
WE HAVE ALL THE SIDEWALK AND
THREE FEET OF LAWN EXTENSION
FIRST SIGNS AND A FEW STREET
TREES WILL NEGOTIATE WITH EACH
RESIDENT.
SO IT GOES UP TO HARP'S AND
THEN HARP'S AND ATCH BOTH HAVE
SIDEWALKS SO THE SIDEWALK
SYSTEM CONTINUES.
WE WANT TO TRY TO GET ALL THE
SIDEWALKS CONNECTED TO EACH
OTHER EVENTUALLY.
>> ANY QUESTIONS?
YEAH THANKS DENHA IF I COULD
JUST ADD ONE OTHER JUST NOTE
ONE OF THE REASONS WE'RE
BRINGING THIS TO THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION IS
THAT THERE IS STILL A RULE ON
THE BOOKS THAT THE REMOVAL
OF PARKING FOR MORE THAN ONE
BLOCK REQUIRES COUNCIL APPROVAL
SO YOU CAN SEE SIGNS FOR
REMOVING PARKING ON ONE SIDE
THE STREET OR ONE IS IT ROUGHLY
THREE BLOCKS OR SO?
THIS WOULD HAVE TO GO TO CITY
COUNCIL FOR ULTIMATE APPROVAL.
AND SO BECAUSE WE LIKE TO BRING
THESE MATTERS BEFORE THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION TO
GET A RECOMMENDATION FROM YOU
ALL BEFORE TAKING THAT TO
COUNCIL THAT'S WHY IT'S BEFORE
TODAY.
AND THEN JUST ONE OTHER THING
TO NOTE IS THIS STREET IS VERY
NARROW AND WE LOOKED VERY
CLOSELY AT THE PARKING
CONDITIONS, SIDEWALK CONDITION
,ALL OF THAT AND WE FEEL THAT
WE HAVE A PROPOSAL IN FRONT
OF YOU REALLY IS KIND OF A
COMPROMISE TO STILL ALLOW
PARKING ON ONE SIDE AND STILL
HAVE A SORT FAIRLY CALM STREET
BECAUSE OF HOW NARROW IT IS.
BUT THEN ALSO INCORPORATE THAT
SIDEWALK WHICH IS LACKING
PRETTY MUCH THROUGH THIS ENTIRE
LENGTH OF THE PROJECT.
>> SO YEAH, MATT, GO AHEAD.
OH THANKS.
QUESTION PER STAFF OUR STAFF
RECOMMENDING THIS APPROACH AND
HAVE YOU AND YOU I THINK YOU
JUST SAID YOU DID SPEAK WITH
SOME PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT ALONG
THE CORRIDOR.
WELL, AFTER THE TWENTY TWENTY
TWO ELECTION NOW CITY BANABA IS
GOING TO BE TRYING TO FILL THE
SIDEWALK GAPS.
>> THE SYSTEM ARE USING THE NEW
SIDEWALK VILLAGE SO EVENTUALLY
WE WANT TO TRY TO GET SIDEWALKS
EVERYWHERE THERE AREN'T THIS
CAME UP THIS YEAR BECAUSE WE'RE
GOING TO BE RESURFACING IN THIS
AREA AND SO WE WANTED TO GET
THE SIDEWALK IN THAT WAS
ALREADY IN SIPI AT THAT POINT
AND ALSO WE HAD A PETITION FROM
RESIDENTS IN THE AREA THAT GAVE
IT EXTRA POINTS ON THAT
PRIORITY LIST AND SO AND THEN
IN WALKING AND TALKING WITH ALL
THE RESIDENTS AND THEIR
CONCERNS AND AND THEN FOLLOWING
UP WITH INDIVIDUALS, THIS IS
THE ENGINEER'S RECOMMENDATION
TO NARROW THIS HICCOUGHS LANES
TO TEN FEET EACH AND PUT IT IN
A SIDEWALK SO AND THEN A
SIDEWALK THAT'S NOT RIGHT AT
THE BACK OF RIGHT AWAY SO WE
CAN MAINTAIN SOME OF THE
DRIVEWAY LENGTH AND LANDSCAPING
TREES ON THE EAST SIDE OF THE
ROAD.
THANK YOU.
I'M GENERALLY SUPPORTIVE.
>> THANK YOU ERIKA.
YEAH, THANKS.
>> SO IT JUST MAKES SENSE THE
PARKING REMOVAL DEFINITELY
SUPPORTIVE OF THAT.
I'M JUST CURIOUS ABOUT THE
DECISION NOT TO CONTINUE THE
SIDEWALK ON THE OPPOSITE SIDE
OF THE STREET.
IS THERE JUST NOT THE WIDTH PER
MAKING THAT HAPPEN OR IS THAT A
DECISION TO IS THE COMPROMISE
TO MAINTAIN THE PARKING ON THAT
SIDE OF THE ROAD?
>> UM, NO.
I THINK IT'S BECAUSE OF THE
FUNDING THAT WE SET ASIDE FOR
IT WHEN WE GOT THE PETITION
THEY DIDN'T SPECIFY WHICH SIDE
OF THE ROAD THEY WANTED IT ON
BUT THE MONEY WE PROGRAMED IN
THE SIPI FOR IT WOULD ONLY
COVER ONE SIDE.
SO IN THE FUTURE THE PRIORITY
LEVEL OF THE WEST SIDE OF THE
ROAD MAY COME UP AGAIN IN THE
FUTURE
.
I'LL ADD TO THAT IF YOU DON'T
MIND THE FUNDING WAS DEFINITELY
PART OF IT.
WE HAD ENOUGH MONEY SET ASIDE
TO BUILD SIDEWALK ON ONE SIDE
AND TO TRY TO AVOID A LOT
OF THOSE NATURAL FEATURES
MOVING THE CURB ADDED A GOOD
AMOUNT OF COST TO THIS AS WELL.
IT'S A VERY NARROW ROAD.
THERE'S NOT A LOT OF SPACE OUT
THERE AND OUR OUR DESIGN ARE
BASICALLY WE SETTLED ON YOU
KNOW, LET'S AT LEAST GET A
SIDEWALK ON ONE SIDE SO THAT WE
YOU KNOW, PEDESTRIANS ALONG
THIS STRETCH CAN BE ABLE TO
WALK UP AND DOWN THE CORRIDOR.
IT'S NOT TO PRECLUDE THAT IN
THE FUTURE SIDEWALK COULDN'T BE
BUILT ON THE OTHER SIDE BUT
IT'S TIGHT IN THERE AND THIS
WAS KIND OF THE YOU KNOW, KIND
OF THE BEST WE FELT WE COULD DO
FOR THE TIME BEING.
SO IS IT BEING FUNDED BY THE
CHP OR FROM THE SIDEWALK
MILEAGE THE SIDEWALK THIS IS
BEING FUNDED FROM THE SIDEWALK
.
PETER YEAH, I GUESS I WAS ALSO
WONDERING ABOUT THE DECISION TO
ONLY DO THE SIDEWALK ON ONE
SIDE LIKE REALISTICALLY WHEN WE
COME BACK FROM AND PUT THAT IN
,IT WILL LIKELY BE A LONG TIME
BEFORE WE COME BACK.
BUT THE SIDEWALK ON THE OTHER
SIDE BECAUSE I MEAN WE HAVE
MANY, MANY, MANY MILES
OF SIDEWALK THROUGHOUT THE CITY
TO DO AND YOU KNOW, I COULDN'T
PREDICT WHEN WE WOULD BE BACK
HERE.
UM, I GUESS MY MY SENSE ON THIS
IS THAT WE HAVE A STANDARD
WHICH IS COMPLETE COMPLETE
STREETS THAT THAT HAS SIDEWALK
ON BOTH SIDES AND WHEN WE
DEVIATE FROM THAT STANDARD IT
IT BECOMES THAT MUCH MORE
DIFFICULT TO ENFORCE AND FOUND
IN PLACES WHERE PEOPLE DON'T
WANT SIDEWALKS.
I IMAGINE THAT THIS WILL BE
OFFERED UP AS AN EXAMPLE BUT A
WAY TO DO A COMPROMISE EVEN
THOUGH I I DON'T THINK IT'S A
GOOD COMPROMISE.
SO THAT'S MY CONCERN ABOUT UM
YOU KNOW, COMING UP WITH A
SOLUTION THAT ONLY HAS THE
SIDEWALK ON ONE SIDE.
UM,
THIS ALSO INCLUDES A LAWN
EXTENSION.
I MEAN THAT'S THREE THREE FEET
OF WIDTH THAT COULD BE USED FOR
UM YOU KNOW FOR THE SIDEWALK ON
BOTH SIDES.
>> IS THERE IT'S A POLICY
OF THE CITY TO PUT THREE FEET
OF LONG EXTENSION THERE SO IT
CAN HAVE ROOM FOR SIGNS SO
VEHICLES PASSING DON'T HIT THE
SIGNS IF THEY'RE IF THEY'RE OUT
AND ALSO IN THE WINTER TIME
RESIDENTS USE IT FOR SNOW
STORAGE.
>> OK, IT'S ALSO OUR POLICY TO
HAVE SIDEWALKS ON BOTH SIDES.
SO I THAT SEEMS LIKE SOMETHING
HAS TO DO SO UM I GUESS I'M NOT
SURE WHAT THE RIGHT THING TO DO
BECAUSE
UM SO QUESTION BACK TO
STAFF.
THE ENGINEERS RECOMMENDED THIS
PARTICULAR CONFIGURATION OF THE
SIDEWALK ON ONE SIDE OF THE
STREET I THINK YOU SAID BECAUSE
THE ROAD IS UNUSUALLY NARROW.
THEY HAVE MISHEARD THAT BUT
PLEASE CORRECT ME IF THAT'S
WRONG IN TERMS OF CONSISTENCY
WITH OTHER THINGS.
YOU KNOW, IF SOMEONE WERE TO
SAY HEY, DO THE SAME THING OVER
HERE, I THINK WE WOULD POINT
OUT THAT OUR STREET MAYBE IS
NOT AS NARROW IS IT'S JUST A
QUESTION OF SHOEHORNING
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE IN AS
IT CAN BE ACCOMMODATED.
AND WHY DIDN'T THE WHY DIDN'T
THE ENGINEER RECOMMEND SIDEWALK
ON BOTH SIDES?
WHEN PATRICK CAME TO ME IT WAS
ALREADY DECIDED TO PUT
SIDEWALKS ON ONE SIDE OF THE
STREET AND IT WAS OUR OUR JOB
TO DECIDE WHICH SIDE OF THE
STREET THAT WOULD BE ON
ASSEMBLY.
NICK AND SPEAK WEREN'T THAT HOW
IT DEVELOPED BUT IF YOU SEE
CLOSELY AT THIS 20 FOOT FACE TO
FACE DRIVING WE SEE THE RIGHT
AWAY HERE THE VERY DARK LINE
THAT WE WERE ABLE TO SAVE SOME
OF THEIR LANDSCAPING BECAUSE
ORIGINALLY WE WERE GOING TO PUT
THE SIDEWALK RIGHT WHERE THAT
LINE IS IN FACT TO TAKE OUT A
LOT MORE
.
>> BUT PART OF THE PART OF THIS
COMES DOWN TO WE HAVE VERY
LIMITED FUNDS TO THE SIDEWALK
MILLAGE AND WE CAN YOU KNOW, WE
CAN ONLY DO SO MUCH EACH YEAR
WITH THE WITH THE MONEY THAT WE
HAVE AVAILABLE.
SO I MEAN, YOU KNOW, IS IT IS
IT BETTER TO BUILD A SIDEWALK
ON BOTH SIDES OF THIS VERY
SMALL RESIDENTIAL STREET OR IS
IT BETTER TO BUILD MORE
SIDEWALKS AND MORE PLACES BUT
FUNDING IS LIMITED?
SO I MEAN THAT THAT'S PART
OF THAT'S PART OF IT.
THE IMPACTS OF BUILDING THE
SIDEWALK ARE QUITE SUBSTANTIAL.
THAT'S WHY WE'RE MOVING THE
SIDEWALK ON THE EAST SIDE TO
TRY TO CREATE MORE SPACE TO
BUILD THE SIDEWALK ON THE EAST
SIDE AND WE WOULD HAVE TO HAVE
YOU KNOW, PROBABLY SOMETHING
SIMILAR DONE ON THE WEST SIDE
IN ORDER TO BUILD THE SIDEWALK
WHICH DOESN'T LEAVE A WHOLE LOT
OF ROAD LEFT EITHER.
BUT THERE'S GOING TO BE CASES
WHERE WE'RE GOING TO BE
BRINGING SIDEWALK GAP FILLING
PROJECTS FORWARD WHERE FOR THE
TIME BEING WE'RE ONLY BUILDING
SIDEWALK ON ONE SIDE OF THE
STREET BECAUSE THE COST
OF BUILDING TWO SIDES IS SO
GREAT THAT YOU KNOW, WE HAVE TO
KIND OF PICK AND CHOOSE SOME
DEGREE IF WE HAD UNLIMITED
FUNDING WE'D BE BUILDING IT ON
BOTH SIDES HERE.
>> YEAH, YEAH.
>> AND THEN I GUESS I'M SORRY.
I JUST WANT TO INTERJECT I DID
WANT TO CONFIRM THAT THIS RIGHT
AWAY IS NARROW IN MOST IT'S
FORTY FEET VERSUS MARYLAND
SIXTY SIX FEET.
WE DID GET A LIKE A VARIANCE TO
PUT THE SIDEWALK HERE RIGHT
AGAINST THE BACK OF CURB
BECAUSE THE TRANSPORTATION TEAM
DIDN'T BELIEVE THAT THERE WAS
GOING TO BE A NEED FOR ANY
SIGNS IN THAT LOCATION IF WE
WERE TO DO IT ON THE WEST SIDE
IN THE FUTURE WE EITHER HAVE TO
DO IN THE SAME WAY WHICH I
BELIEVE THEY'RE GOING TO BE
FINE.
SO WE'LL HAVE TO GET PERMANENT
EASEMENTS FROM THE RESIDENTS
THERE IS A BLOCK HERE THAT GOES
FOR YOU.
THEN IT COMES OUT NEXT JUST
ONE BLOCK THAT OR ALL GET ONE
BLOCK ON THE HALF THE THE OTHER
.
WE DO HAVE AN INCREASE RIGHT
AWAY FROM THE PLAT BOOKS BUT
AND THEN WE SHIFT THE SIDEWALK
WITHIN THE RIGHT AWAY AT THAT
TIME BUT WE DO HAVE TO GET SOME
EASEMENTS.
>> WE WANTED TO DO IT ON THE
WEST SIDE IN THE INTERESTS
OF NOT LETTING THE PERFECT BE
THE ENEMY OF THE POSSIBLE.
>> MR. CHAIR, I WOULD MOVE TO
ACCEPT THE RECOMMENDATION AS
TABLED.
THANK YOU OP ED
.
YEAH, I THINK THAT'S PROBABLY
THE RIGHT THING TO DO THAT
WOULD SECOND THAT I WOULD LIKE
TO ADD RAYMOND THE I GUESS I'M
SORRY I'D LIKE TO ADD NEKE THAT
IF WE ARE GOING TO BE FACED
WITH A SITUATION WHERE OUR
SIDEWALK VILLAGE AND THE AMOUNT
OF FUNDING THAT WE HAVE IS
GOING TO MEAN THAT WE NEED TO
MAKE DECISIONS ABOUT WHICH SIDE
OF THE STREET TO PUT SIDEWALK
ON IN LOTS OF PLACES THEN I
WOULD REALLY LIKE TO SEE SOME
EFFORT PUT INTO DECISION MAKING
GUIDELINES IN ADVANCE.
I DO NOT WANT TO FIND OURSELVES
IN A SITUATION WHERE WE GO FROM
PROJECT TO PROJECT ARGUING
ABOUT WHICH SIDE OF THE STREET
THE SIDEWALK SHOULD BE ON AND
HAVING TO HAVE A LOT OF YOU
KNOW, A LOT OF DISCUSSION AND
AND CONTROVERSY OVER WE NEED TO
DECIDE WHAT OUR GUIDELINES ARE
IN ADVANCE AND AND THEN BE
READY TO APPLY THEM AND IF
THERE ARE PLACES WHERE THEY
ABSOLUTELY DON'T WORK OK, THEN
WE CAN MAKE EXCEPTIONS IN THE
RARE CASES.
BUT PLEASE LET'S HAVE SOME
GUIDELINES FOR THAT IF THAT'S
WHAT WE'RE GOING TO DO NOW BACK
TO MATT CARPENTERS' MOTION.
>> I WOULD LIKE TO SECOND IT SO
BACK TO THE AGENDA HERE.
WHAT WE'RE BEING ASKED TO
CONSIDER FOR THE PURPOSES
OF THIS BUSINESS ITEM IS THE
REMOVAL PARKING ON ONE SIDE.
>> LET'S SEE.
YEAH, YEAH.
SO THIS ISN'T REALLY THAT I
GUESS IT'S IMPLYING APPROVAL
OF THE DESIGN AS A WHOLE BUT
WHAT WE'RE VOTING ON AS A
COMMISSION TONIGHT IS ABOUT
REMOVING PARKING FROM ONE SIDE
OF THE STREET AND SO IS THERE
ANY OTHER DISCUSSION ON THE
DESIGN OR THE MOTION TO REMOVE
PARKING AND THEN SEND IT TO
COUNCIL?
I JUST WANTED TO MAKE A QUICK
COMMENT THAT I LIVE NEARBY AND
I'M EXCITED THIS IS LIKE A
THOROUGHFARE.
WE USE THAT TERM WHILE WE
DISCUSSING IT.
A LOT OF PEOPLE WALKING UP AND
DOWN ALL THE TIME.
SO YEAH, I WOULD LOVE TO SEE
SIDEWALKS ON BOTH SIDES
EVENTUALLY BUT UNDERSTOOD THE
LIMITATIONS AND I THINK THIS IS
GOING TO BE A GOOD ADDITION TO
THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
SO THANKS STUFF.
THANKS.
THANKS EVERYBODY.
ALL RIGHT.
SO IS THERE EMOTION TO
RECOMMEND APPROVAL OF THE
REMOVAL OF PARKING AT ONE SIDE
OF THE STREET PAGE BETWEEN
MEGHAN MOVED BY MEGHAN SEGMENT
AND WILL ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
OF THE MOTION PLEASE RAISE YOUR
HAND ALL THIS AND PLEASE SAY NO
OR RAISE YOUR HAND.
THE MOTION PASSES.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU AND I'M SORRY I WAS
TYPING SO I DOES WERE WE.
I THOUGHT THAT WAS ALREADY THE
MOTION FROM MATT SECONDED BY
PETE BUT THEN THERE IS THE MY
IMPRESSION THAT THAT WAS JUST
KIND OF AN INFORMAL I MET A OK
I JUST WANT TO MAKE YOU HAPPY
WITH IT WHEN IT SHOWS WHO MADE
THE MOTION AND THE SECOND I
JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE BUT I'M
NOT CAPTURING IT PROPERLY SO
SHORT LIST BROKEN AND ONLY THEN
AS THE FIRST AND SECOND.
OK ALL RIGHT.
>> ALL RIGHT.
MOVING ON TO INFORMATION AND
DISCUSSION FIRST UP IS THE
TWENTY TWENTY FOR STREET
RESURFACING AND RELATED
PROJECTS TOPIC.
EVERY YEAR WE GET AN UPDATE
FROM THE ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT
ON THE PROJECTS PLANNED FOR
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR AND WHICH
AREAS ARE SCHEDULED TO BE
RESURFACED.
SO NICK HUTCHINSON WILL BE
GIVING US THAT PRESENTATION
EVENING AND ANSWERING ANY
QUESTIONS.
NICK.
OK, THANK YOU.
I'M GOING TO SHARE MY SCREEN
HERE AND HOPEFULLY THAT WORKS
PROPERLY ON SOMETHING HERE
WHILE I GET THAT OK HOPEFULLY
SEE MY PRESENTATION SCREEN
COMES UP ON THAT OK THANK YOU
ALL.
EXCELLENT.
SO THIS IS THIS IS OUR ANNUAL
PRESENTATION OF THE ROAD
IMPROVEMENTS FOR EACH YEAR AND
I'LL ACKNOWLEDGE UPFRONT THAT
IT IS NOT FEBRUARY TWENTY FIRST
TWO THOUSAND TWENTY FOUR BUT
AFTER THIS GOT BUMPED FROM LAST
AGENDA I NEVER CHANGE THE DATE
SO IGNORE THAT.
SO LET'S SEE HERE HOW DO I MOVE
THIS FORWARD.
OK THAT'LL DO IT.
I THINK I'M ASSUMING YOU CAN
SEE THE SECOND SLIDE NOW.
YES
OK GOOD
.
>> SO THIS THIS PRESENTATION IS
GOING TO BE KIND OF SKEWED
TOWARDS MORE OF A GENERAL
OVERVIEW OF OUR CONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS FOR THIS YEAR.
WE WILL GET INTO SOME OF THE
SPECIFICS BUT I WANT TO START
BY COVERING SOME OF THE
BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW ABOUT
ABOUT PAVEMENT IMPROVEMENT
PROJECTS IN GENERAL STARTING
WITH THE DIFFERENT TYPES
OF RESURFACING TYPE TREATMENTS
THAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT THE
AND THEY FALL INTO THREE
GENERAL CATEGORIES.
THE FIRST ONE IS PRESERVATION
AND THOSE ARE THOSE ARE CAPITAL
PREVENTATIVE MAINTENANCE TYPE
PROJECTS.
THOSE ARE PROJECTS THAT ARE
LIKE CAPE SEALE'S SURFACE
TREATMENTS.
THEY'RE BASICALLY IMPROVEMENTS
THAT ARE DONE ON ROADS THAT ARE
INTO BETTER CONDITION TO
MAINTAIN THEM IN THOSE IN THAT
GOOD CONDITION AND IT GENERALLY
IS SOMETHING THAT'S ADDED ONTO
THE EXISTING SURFACE WITHOUT
REALLY TEARING UP THE EXISTING
SURFACE.
WE'RE GOING TO FOCUS TONIGHT A
LITTLE BIT MORE ON THE SECOND
TO THE NEXT LEVEL UP FROM THAT
IS WHAT WE CALL A RESTORATION.
THAT'S WHERE WE REMOVE PART
OF THE ASPHALT PAVEMENT MAYBE
ONLY MILL DOWN PORTION OF IT
AND THEN REPAVE A NEW SURFACE
ON TOP OF THAT.
SO THAT'S THAT'S USUALLY JUST
DEALING WITH THE PAVEMENT.
NOT A LOT OF THE OTHER
ANCILLARY THINGS ALTHOUGH WE
WILL DO THINGS LIKE DRAINS AND
STUFF LIKE THAT.
THE THIRD ONE UP IS WHAT WE
WOULD CALL A REHABILITATION AND
THAT'S WHERE THE PAVEMENT HAS
DEGRADED SUCH A POINT WHERE YOU
REALLY CAN'T DO ANYTHING ELSE
WITH THAT OTHER THAN COMPLETELY
REMOVING THAT ASPHALT AND
REPAVING THE WHOLE YOU KNOW,
THE ASPHALT PAVEMENT.
THERE IS A FOURTH YEAR WHICH
WOULD WHAT WE WOULD CALL A
RECONSTRUCTION.
WE DON'T USE THOSE VERY MUCH
BECAUSE THEY ARE VERY COSTLY
AND IN A RECONSTRUCTION ARE
REALLY TEARING UP EVERYTHING
YOU'RE GOING DOWN INTO THE BASE
YOU'RE TEARING OUT USUALLY CURB
AND GUTTER AND THOSE ARE MUCH
MORE MAJOR PROJECTS AND ALSO
QUITE COSTLY.
SO WHY DO WE USE ALL THESE
DIFFERENT TREATMENTS?
IT REALLY COMES DOWN TO
PAVEMENT ASSET MANAGEMENT AND
THERE'S A LINK HERE IN THE
PRESENTATION THAT WILL BRING IN
ONE OF OUR WEB PAGES THAT TALKS
ABOUT THAT AND A LOT MORE
DETAIL WHICH I'M NOT GOING TO
GO INTO THAT MUCH DETAIL HERE
TONIGHT BUT WHAT IT REALLY
COMES DOWN TO IS USING THE
RIGHT FIX FOR THE RIGHT STREET
AT THE RIGHT TIME AND THAT'S
HOW WE REALLY THAT PHILOSOPHY
IS REALLY HOW WE MOVE THAT THE
OVERALL CONDITION OF OUR SYSTEM
FORWARD.
OK, NEXT WANTED TO LOOK AT SOME
OF WHAT THE CORE ELEMENTS
OF THESE TYPE OF TREATMENTS ARE
SO THE KEY THING OBVIOUSLY IS
TO REPAIR THAT EXISTING
PAVEMENT SURFACE EITHER REPAIR
OR REPLACE THAT SURFACE SO THAT
WE GET A NICE FLAT SMOOTH NEW
ROAD.
WE DO INCLUDE SOME CURB
REPLACEMENT AS NEEDED THAT'S
MOSTLY IN THOSE REHABILITATIONS
WHERE WE'RE TAKING OFF ALL THE
ASPHALT EITHER TO REPAIR SOME
CURB THAT'S IN REALLY POOR
CONDITION OR HAS BEEN SHIFTED
TO PLACE TO MAINTAIN PROPER
DRAINAGE.
SO THIS TYPE OF WORK IS
GENERALLY CONTAINED WITHIN THE
EXISTING ROAD FOOTPRINT.
SO WHILE WE MIGHT BE DOING A
PATCH CURB HERE PATCH THERE,
WE'RE NOT TEARING UP THE CURB.
WE'RE NOT MOVING CURB WISE.
WE'RE NOT WIDENING NARROWING
ROADS, THINGS LIKE THAT.
AND FOR THESE TYPES
OF PROJECTS, DATA COLLECTION
AND DETAILED DESIGN ARE PRETTY
MINIMAL AND THAT HELPS KEEP THE
COST OF THESE TYPE
OF TREATMENTS DOWN RELATIVELY
LOW AND ALLOWS US TO DO MORE
OF THEM
.
OK, SO LOOKING AT SOME OF THE
OTHER OPPORTUNITIES THAT WE
HAVE TO GO ON WITH THESE
PROJECTS, ONE OF THEM IS WE DO
A LITTLE BIT OF WORK ON
DRAINAGE AND STORMWATER AS I
MENTIONED WE MAY BE REPLACING
SOME CURB JUST TO HELP
STORMWATER FLOW A LITTLE BIT
BETTER BUT WE ALSO REPLACE SOME
OF THE CATCH BASINS AND CATCH
BASINS EITHER TO REPAIR THEM OR
MODERNIZE THEM.
WE ALSO LOOK AT REPLACING ANY
SIDEWALK RAMPS THAT ARE NOT
COMPLIANT WITH THE AMERICANS
DISABILITIES ACT.
THAT'S STANDARD PRACTICE FOR
ANY OF THESE RESURFACING
PROJECTS AND THEN LOOKING AT
OPPORTUNITIES TO YOU KNOW, TO
GET US IN ALIGNMENT WITH OUR
VISION ZERO PLAN AND THEN
TRAFFIC CALMING AND SPEED
MANAGEMENT WHICH MANY OF YOU
WILL RECALL BACK IN SEPTEMBER
OF LAST YEAR THERE WAS A
RESOLUTION PASSED BY CITY
COUNCIL.
YOU KNOW, FOR US TO BE LOOKING
AT OPPORTUNITIES WITH ALL
OF OUR RESURFACING PROJECTS FOR
INTRODUCING TRAFFIC COMING OR
SPEED MANAGEMENT ELEMENTS NOW
WE'RE STILL WORKING ON
DEVELOPING EXACTLY WHAT THOSE
CRITERIA ARE FOR WHEN WE DO
THAT AND WHAT TYPES TREATMENTS
WE WOULD PUT IN.
SO THIS IS A LITTLE BIT OF A
TRANSITION BUT I'LL TALK A
LITTLE BIT MORE ON SOME FUTURE
SLIDES ABOUT SOME OF THE THINGS
THAT WE ARE DOING WITH SOME
OF OUR PROJECTS THIS YEAR.
SO WORK GETS ACCOMPLISHED
THROUGH VARIOUS MEANS AND A LOT
OF THESE ARE THROUGH VARIOUS
DIFFERENT TYPES OF PROJECTS.
THE FIRST ONE AS I MENTIONED AT
THE VERY BEGINNING IS OUR
ANNUAL PREVENTATIVE MAINTENANCE
PROGRAM.
THAT'S ITS OWN PROJECT WITH ITS
OWN PROJECT MANAGER AND ITS AND
ITS OWN CONTRACT AND THAT'S FOR
DOING THINGS LIKE THE CRACKED
CEILING IN THE CAPE SEALS AND
STUFF LIKE THAT.
AND WE TREAT THAT AS A
COMPLETELY SEPARATE CONTRACT
BECAUSE IT'S A DIFFERENT TYPE
OF CONTRACTOR.
DOES THAT KIND OF WORK AND SO
IT JUST MAKES SENSE TO HAVE
THAT SEPARATED OUT FROM THE
REST OF THE ROAD WORK.
THE NEXT THING IS OUR ANNUAL
STREET RESURFACING PROGRAM.
THIS PRIMARILY FOCUSES ON OUR
LOCAL NEIGHBORHOOD RESIDENTIAL
STREETS ALTHOUGH OCCASIONALLY
WE'LL THROW IN A A MAJOR STREET
IN WITH THAT AS WELL.
AND AGAIN THAT IS A THAT IS A
SEPARATE PROGRAM WITH ITS OWN
PROJECT MANAGER, ITS OWN
CONTRACT AND EVERYTHING THAT
PROGRAM THE WAY WE'VE BEEN
RUNNING IT TENDS TO FOCUS ON GO
KIND OF NEIGHBORHOOD BY
NEIGHBORHOOD AROUND THE CITY
AND THE ADVANTAGES TO DOING IT
THAT WAY ARE THAT WE CAN COME
INTO A NEIGHBORHOOD ONCE, GET A
WHOLE LOT OF THE DOES NOT HAVE
TO BE IN AND OUT ALL THE TIME
DISTURBING PEOPLE AND WE ALSO
GET BUNDLING THAT TOGETHER AND
KEEPING THE CONTRACTOR IN ONE
AREA HELPS, YOU KNOW, GET US
BETTER COSTS AS WELL.
THE NEXT TYPE OF PROJECT IS A
STANDALONE UTILITY PROJECT WE
THINK UTILITY PROJECT YOU DON'T
NECESSARILY THINK ROADS BUT
VERY MANY OF THOSE ARE THE TYPE
OF PROJECTS WHERE WE WILL WILL
COME IN.
WE'LL DO THE UTILITY WORK MORE
OFTEN THAN NOT IT'S WATER MAIN
TYPE WORK AND THEN ONCE WE GET
THE WATER MAIN IN THE GROUND
THEN WE WILL RESURFACE THE ROAD
AFTERWARDS AND THOSE THOSE ARE
DIFFERENT TYPES OF CONTRACTORS
THAT TEND TO DO THOSE TYPES
OF UNDERGROUND PROJECTS AND
MOST OF THOSE ARE OUR
STANDALONE UTILITY PROJECTS AS
WELL AND OCCASIONALLY BUNDLED
SOME OF THOSE TOGETHER AS WELL.
AND THEN THERE'S OTHER
STANDALONE PROJECTS.
THE PICTURE ON THE SCREEN HERE
CYO CHURCH IS A GOOD EXAMPLE
OF THAT SOMETIMES ESPECIALLY ON
THE MAJOR ROADS PROJECTS ARE
JUST BIG ENOUGH THAT IT MAKES
SENSE TO DO THEM AS THEIR OWN
CONTRACTS.
OK, SO WE'LL LOOK AT SOME
OF THE SPECIFICS HERE OF WHAT
IS GOING ON IN THIS YEAR IN
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR AND ON THE
SCREEN HERE I HAVE A COUPLE
OF LINKS THAT ARE VERY HANDY
FOR YOU TO KNOW.
THE FIRST ONE HERE IS ARE A
LINK TO OUR PAGE OUR WEB PAGE
WITH OUR CURRENTLY HAPPENING
ROAD CONSTRUCTION PROJECT.
SO ANYTHING ANY PLACE WHERE
WE'VE GOT ROADS CLOSED OR
DETOURS POSTED, IT'S BASICALLY
A LIST OF IF YOU WANT TO KNOW
WHAT'S CLOSED RIGHT NOW, THIS
IS THE PLACE TO GO PROBABLY
EVEN MORE INFORMATIVE.
THE SECOND LINK ARE OUR
DASHBOARD OR MULTIPAGE
DASHBOARD FOR A TWO GO BIG A
TWO STREETS AND I PRESENTED ON
THIS LAST YEAR ACTUALLY THIS IS
A DASHBOARD WITH SEVERAL
DIFFERENT PAGES ON IT.
IT COVERS ROAD CONDITION
RATINGS.
IT COVERS ALL OF THE ROAD WORK
ON A MAP THAT WE'RE GOING TO BE
DOING THIS YEAR.
AND THEN THERE'S ALSO ANOTHER
PAGE THAT LOOKS OUT AT PLANNED
PROJECTS FOR THE COMING YEARS
INTO THE FUTURE AS WELL.
SO I HYPE THAT UP AS MUCH AS I
CAN IF YOU WANT TO KNOW WHAT'S
GOING ON AND WHAT WILL BE GOING
ON IN ANN ARBOR, THAT'S THE
PLACE TO GO.
SO HANG ON TO THOSE LINKS IF
YOU DON'T HAVE THEM ALREADY
HANDY.
SO NOW WE'LL LOOK AT SOME MORE
SPECIFICS IN HERE.
ONE OF THE OTHER PAGES ON THAT
DASHBOARD THAT I JUST MENTIONED
IS A PAGE RELATED TO OUR ROAD
BOND FUNDS.
IF YOU RECALL A COUPLE OF YEARS
AGO CITY COUNCIL APPROVED A
ROAD BOND TO ACCELERATE SOME
ROAD WORK AND THIS MAP SHOWS
ALL OF THAT ROAD WORK THOSE I
KNOW IT'S KIND OF SMALL BUT
THOSE ARE THE ONES THAT ARE
KIND OF A REDDISH COLOR THERE
WERE THINGS THAT WERE DONE IN
TWENTY TWENTY TO THE BLUE ONES
ARE PROJECTS THAT WERE
COMPLETED IN TWENTY TWENTY
THREE AND THEN THE PURPLE ONES
ARE WHAT'S LEFT FOR US TO DO
THIS YEAR IN TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
AND I LIST SOME OF THOSE OVER
THERE ON THE SIDE PAGE YOSE
NORTHBROOK, NORFOLK AND SUFFOLK
AND A COUPLE MORE LOCATIONS
WE'RE REALLY DOING CPM TYPE
TREATMENTS AS WELL.
WE'VE MADE GREAT PROGRESS WITH
SPENDING THOSE BOND FUNDS AND
WE EXPECT TO HAVE THEM
COMPLETELY EXPENDED BY THE END
OF TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
.
NEXT UP HERE WE'LL LOOK AT THE
ANNUAL STREET RESURFACING
PROGRAM.
LIKE I MENTIONED, WE TEND TO GO
NEIGHBORHOOD BY NEIGHBORHOOD ON
THIS THIS YEAR WE'RE FOCUSING
ON THE LAKEWOOD NEIGHBORHOOD
WHICH YOU SEE THERE ON THE LEFT
OF THE PICTURE.
AS YOU CAN SEE, WE'RE
RESURFACING MOST OF THAT ENTIRE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
WE'VE ALSO ADDED BIRDWOOD WHICH
IS OVER THERE BY JACKSON
STADIUM AS WELL.
THIS ISN'T THE ONLY WORK WE'RE
DOING THROUGH THE TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR RESURFACING PROGRAM
BECAUSE THOSE THOSE STREETS ON
THE PREVIOUS SLIDE THAT WE'RE
BOND FUNDED STREETS ARE ALSO
BEING INCLUDED IN THIS CONTRACT
AS WELL
.
>> OK, MAJOR, WE HAVE SOME
MAJOR STREET PROJECTS THIS YEAR
AS WELL.
THE HILL STREET PROJECT WHICH
IS THE SECOND HALF OF THE HILL
STATE PROJECT THAT STARTED LAST
YEAR IS ALREADY UNDERWAY THERE
OUT THERE INSTALLING WATER MAIN
RIGHT NOW IF YOU'VE TRIED TO
DRIVE ANYWHERE THROUGH THAT
AREA, YOU PROBABLY KNOW THAT WE
ALSO HAVE MILLER COMING UP THAT
HASN'T QUITE GONE UP TO BID YET
BUT IT SHOULD BE GOING UP VERY
SHORTLY.
WE'RE NOT SURE THE FULL LIMITS
OF THAT ARE NEWPORT DOWN TO
SHAPEN.
WE'RE NOT SURE IF WE'RE GOING
TO BE ABLE TO GET THAT ALL DONE
IN ONE YEAR BECAUSE IT'S GOING
A LITTLE BIT LATE IF WE DON'T
THAN THE FIRST PHASE THAT WILL
BE FROM NEWPORT DOWN SEVEN IN
THE NEXT PART OF THAT IN THE
SPRING OF TWENTY FIVE BUT
THAT'LL BE WATER MAIN STORM
SEWER FULL RESURFACING AND THEN
KIND OF THIS PART OF THAT AS
WELL THERE'S THE THE CYCLE
TRACK TO THAT WE'VE BEEN
TALKING ABOUT SO THAT'S STILL
WORKING ON ALL THE DETAILS
OF THAT AND THEN THERE'S ALSO
THE SEVENTH GREEN TO OUR
PROJECT WE'VE PRESENTED I'M
HAPPY FOR I'M NOT GOING TO GO
INTO TOO MUCH DETAIL ON THAT
BUT THAT WILL BE HAPPENING THIS
YEAR AS WELL.
AND THEN LET'S SEE JUST A
COUPLE MORE SLIDES HERE.
I MENTIONED THOSE LOCAL THOSE
LOCAL STREET UTILITY PROJECTS
AND RESURFACING AS WELL.
THESE ARE JUST SOME EXAMPLES
OF THAT THE PRIMARY ONES WE
HAVE GOING ON THIS YEAR, THE
CRESCENT'S NEIGHBORHOOD AS WE
CALL IT SAUNDERS PRSIDENTE
HATCHARD CRESCENT, AAGOT
CRESCENT ALL THOSE UP NORTH THE
MILLER THAT ENTIRE
NEIGHBORHOODS ARE GETTING NEW
WATER MAIN AND THE ROADS WILL
BE TREATED AS WELL.
AND THEN WE GOT SOME WORK DOWN
IN THE DIRT SHIRE INDEPENDENCE
MEDFORD AREA DOWN NEAR
MANCHESTER AND STADIUM.
SAME TYPE OF WORK GOING ON
THERE AND THEN AS PROMISED
TALKING A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
SPEED MANAGEMENT ON SOME
OF THESE LOCAL STREETS AS WELL.
JUST TO MENTION FIRST REAL
QUICKLY THE SEVEN THING
GREENVIEW WHICH IS THE ONES IN
BLUE THERE ON THE RIGHT HAND
SIDE RIGHT HAND CIRCLE AGAIN I
PRESENTED THAT WE'VE PRESENTED
ON THESE BEFORE SO I WON'T GO
INTO TOO MUCH DETAIL BUT THOSE
MAINLY INVOLVE RODENAS GOING
BUMP OUTS, SOME SIDEWALK
IMPROVEMENTS, CROSSWALK
IMPROVEMENTS THROUGH THAT
NEIGHBORHOOD AND THAT WENT
THROUGH A LENGTHY ENGAGEMENT
PROCESS ON THAT AS WELL.
SO THAT WILL BE COMING UP
STARTING IN A FEW WEEKS HERE
AND THEN LOOKING BACK AT THE
RESURFACING PROJECTS, THE ONES
IN RED THERE OVER ON THE LEFT
WE LOOKED AT AS WE'RE LOOKING
AT OPPORTUNITIES FOR SPEED
MANAGEMENT IN THESE AREAS IN
THAT LAKEWOOD NEIGHBORHOOD WE
PARTICULARLY IDENTIFIED THOSE
TWO LONGSTREET'S THAT GO IN AND
OUT OF LAKEWOOD ELEMENTARY
THERE ONE'S GREAT LAKE.
I DON'T REMEMBER THE NAME
OF THE OTHER ONE MASON MAYBE.
BUT THOSE LONG STRAIGHT STREETS
WE IMMEDIATELY IDENTIFIED AS
POTENTIAL CANDIDATES THAT COULD
USE SOME TREATMENTS WE DID DO A
SPEED STUDY OUT THERE SURPRISED
SOMEWHAT SURPRISINGLY THERE
WASN'T ACTUALLY A SPEEDING
PROBLEM IN THAT AREA.
BUT BEING THAT THOSE STREETS
WERE LEADING DIRECTLY INTO A
SCHOOL, WE DECIDED TO ADD SOME
TREATMENTS IN THAT AREA AS
WELL.
WE'RE GOING TO BE PUTTING SOME
BUMP OUTS IN THOSE AREAS ON
THOSE TWO STREETS PULLING A
LITTLE BIT OF SIDEWALK GAP
RIGHT ON ONE OF THOSE
INTERSECTIONS AS WELL.
BUT THERE WERE ALSO AND OUT
OF USING A CURSE OR NOT BUT IN
THIS AREA UP WHERE THE SIGNAL
INTO THIS NEIGHBORHOOD IS OFF
OF JACKSON THERE'S LIKE A Y
INTERSECTION.
THERE WERE LAKEVIEW DRIVE
SPLITS OFF OF LAKE AND WE'RE
GOING TO BE RECONFIGURING THAT
INTERSECTION SO THAT TI'S UP.
SO THE LAKE LAKEVIEW WILL BE UP
IN THE HIGH LAKE AND MAKE
PEOPLE SLOW DOWN TO MAKE A 90
RETURNS.
THEY'RE BEING ABLE TO FIRE
RIGHT OFF, YOU KNOW, WITHOUT
HAVING TO SLOW DOWN.
SO WE ALSO LOOKED AT BURWOOD
NOW BEING THE BURWOOD IS A
FAIRLY STRAIGHT CUT THROUGH
BETWEEN JACKSON AND LIBERTY.
WE ANTICIPATED THERE COULD BE
SOME IS SPEEDING SHOES THERE
GOOD SPEED STUDY THERE AND
INDEED THERE WERE SOME
DEFINITELY SOME SPEEDING ISSUES
IN THAT AREA SO THAT AREA IS
GOING TO GET SOME SOME SPEED
HUMPS, SOME BUMP OUT AND CURVED
EXTENSION AS WELL.
WE ALSO DID FIND THAT THERE
WERE SOME REQUESTS DATING BACK
QUITE A WAYS ON THAT AS WELL.
SO THOSE ARE SOME OF THE
HIGHLIGHTS OF WHAT WE'RE
LOOKING TO DO WITH SOME OF OUR
LOCAL STREET SPEED MANAGEMENT
THINGS ALONG WITH OUR PRODUCTS
HERE YEAR.
OK, SO THAT IS THE END OF MY
PRESENTATION AND I WILL OPEN IT
UP FOR QUESTIONS BUT ALSO
MENTION TOO IF YOU HAVE FURTHER
QUESTIONS ABOUT STREET
RESURFACING PROJECTS THAT'S NOT
MY EMAIL ADDRESS NOT ON THE
SCREEN THERE BUT YOU CAN SEND
THEM TO RESURFACING IT TO GO
BIG AND OR YOU CAN SEND ME TOO
AND THAT'S KIND WHERE WE'RE
FUNNELING A LOT OF OUR RESEARCH
RELATED QUESTIONS SO THAT I
WILL OPEN IT UP FOR QUESTIONS
AND I WILL STOP SHARING HERE SO
THAT I CAN SEE THE OK THANKS
NICK.
>> FIRST UP, LISA.
THANKS SO MUCH NICK.
A COUPLE QUESTIONS FIRST YOU
MENTIONED MILLER AND THE CYCLE
TRACK AND PROPOSED
RECONFIGURATIONS WHERE A
DISCUSSION ITEM AT THE LAST
MEETING DOES THE RESEARCH THE
THING THAT'S BEING PROPOSED
HAVE ANY KIND OF BEARING
RELATED TO THAT OR THE THOUGHT
IN MY MIND IS LIKE DOES IT MAKE
SENSE TO DO THAT IF A
RECONFIGURATION IS COMING LATER
OR IS ONE?
>> YEAH, SURE.
YEAH, THE THE GOOD THING ABOUT
THAT IS THAT WE CAN GO AHEAD,
PUT THE WATER MAIN AND PUT ALL
THE STORMS SEWER WORK IN THAT
WE'RE DOING PAVE THE ROAD THE
THE CYCLE TRACK TREATMENT IS
SOMETHING THAT IS REALLY GOING
TO GO ON THE SURFACE SO WE CAN
GET ALL THAT WORK DONE.
THAT'S THE WAY WE WOULD HAVE
BEEN DOING REGARDLESS.
SO GETTING THE RESURFACING DONE
IS SOMETHING WE CAN DO
REGARDLESS INDEPENDENT OF THE
OF GETTING THE CYCLE TRACK PUT
IT OK GREAT.
AND MY SECOND QUESTION RELATES
SPECIFICALLY TO THE BIRDWOOD
PROJECT.
SO I KNOW THAT I'M WONDERING
WHAT OUTCOMES ARE RESULTS WERE
THE FEEDBACK SURVEY THAT CLOSED
MARCHED FIRST OR IF WE'LL HEAR
ABOUT THOSE AT ALL ON I DON'T
HAVE ANSWERS TO THAT RIGHT HERE
IN FRONT OF ME SO I DON'T HAVE
THE DETAILS FOR THAT TO SHARE
WITH YOU THIS EVENING BUT I CAN
MAKE A NOTE OF THAT AND AND
SHARE THEM WITH THE MISSION.
>> OK, AND I KNOW THERE'S A I
THINK THERE'S AN OPEN HOUSE FOR
THAT ONE COMING UP IN EARLY
APRIL AND MAYBE A GENERAL
QUESTION IS TO WHAT EXTENT?
I KNOW WE HAVE A PRELIMINARY
PLAN FOR BIRDWOOD.
YOU KNOW, TO WHAT EXTENT DO YOU
ANTICIPATE ANY COMMUNITY
FEEDBACK FROM THE OPEN HOUSE?
>> OUR SURVEY WOULD IMPACT THE
FINAL PLAN.
YEAH, AND I UNFORTUNATELY I
HAVEN'T BEEN INVOLVED IN THE
DETAILS OF THIS MYSELF SO I
DON'T HAVE A LOT OF THAT
INFORMATION.
I MEAN GENERALLY SPEAKING, I
GUESS I WOULD SAY THAT BASED ON
THE YOU BASED ON WHAT IS IN THE
COUNCIL RESOLUTION THAT WAS
PASSED BACK IN SEPTEMBER, IT
KIND OF LEAVES IT UP TO STAFF
TO IDENTIFY IF THERE IS A NEED
FOR TRAFFIC CALMING DEVICES.
I MEAN WE'RE WE'RE LIKELY GOING
TO PUT THEM IN.
I MEAN THERE'S BASED ON
FEEDBACK FROM THE NEIGHBORHOOD
WE COULD TWEAK THINGS HERE AND
THERE BUT I DON'T THINK IT'S
GOING TO ALLOW FOR LIKE A
NEIGHBORHOOD VETO FOR EXAMPLE.
>> SURE.
OK, THANK YOU SO MUCH, ERICA
HILL.
THANKS.
GREAT TO SEE ALL THIS WORK.
THE SISTER LAKES AREA IS JUST
AN AREA THAT I HAVE A QUESTION
AROUND AND I SUSPECT THEIR
ASSOCIATION HAS PROVIDED A LOT
OF FEEDBACK INTO THIS ALREADY.
BUT I KNOW THAT WHEN I HAVE
THEY'VE TAKEN ME OUT FOR A
COUPLE OF WALK WALKABOUTS AND
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT HAS BEEN
BROUGHT UP IS JUST THE A LOT
OF FOLKS ARE WALKING DOWN ALONG
FOR SISTER LAKE THAT'S A LOT
PARKLAND THAT'S RIGHT THERE
THERE AREN'T SIDEWALKS.
>> IT IS SOMEWHAT CURVY.
THERE HAD BEEN QUESTIONS ABOUT
WHETHER OR NOT THE CITY MIGHT
BE ABLE TO DO SOMETHING LIKE
ALMOST LIKE WHAT WE DO WITH
PROTECTED BIKE LANES, YOU KNOW,
PUT UP SOME BOLLARDS AND KIND
OF MAKE A MAKESHIFT WALKING
AREA OR SOMETHING AS AN INTERIM
MEASURE.
I DON'T KNOW IF THOSE ARE
CONVERSATIONS THAT WE'RE HAD AS
PART OF THIS PROCESS OR IF WE
HAVE YOU KNOW, JUST
SPECIFICALLY WHAT WAS
CONSIDERED POTENTIALLY FOR
ALONG THE THE PARKLAND IN THE
LAKE THEY'RE YEAH, IT HASN'T
RULED THAT THAT HASN'T REALLY
BEEN SOMETHING THAT HAS THAT
HAS SURFACED AS A AS A HIGH
PRIORITY THE A GOOD CHUNK
OF DRAWING A DRAWING BLANK ON
THE NAME OF THAT STREET THAT
RUNS ALONG THE PARK THERE
MAYBE
ABOUT HALF OF THE NAMES THAT
YOU SAW BUT THERE THERE'S A LOT
OF IT AT A LOT OF THAT ROAD IS
ACTUALLY NOT ON.
THIS IS ONE OF THE FEW ONES
THAT'S ACTUALLY HALFWAY DECENT
CONDITION AND WE'RE DOING A
LITTLE BIT OF LIKE INFILL WORK
UP ON THE NORTHERN BLOCK.
BUT MOST WAS ACTUALLY NOT PART
OF THIS PROGRAM.
SO YEAH, IT HASN'T IT HASN'T
REALLY COME UP AND I'M NOT SURE
THAT IT I'M NOT SURE IT WOULD
REALLY SOMETHING LIKE THAT
WOULD REALLY RISE AS A SUPER
HIGH PRIORITY.
I NOTICED FROM THE NEIGHBORHOOD
PERSPECTIVE I UNDERSTAND HOW IT
IS FROM THE STREET RESURFACING
COMPONENT FOR THIS PROJECT
LEVEL AND I GUESS JUST A
CONFIRMATION ON THIS ONE
BECAUSE THAT'S A LARGE STRETCH
OF THAT AREA IS PARKLAND.
IF SIDEWALKS WERE TO GO IN
THERE THAT WOULD DOES THAT COME
OUT OF THE PARKS BUDGET OR IT
WOULD YEAH.
>> IF IF WE WERE TO BUILD A
SIDEWALK ON THE WEST SIDE
OF THAT STREET WHERE THE
PARKLAND IS THAT WOULD COME OUT
IN PARKS BUDGET.
SO I MEAN THAT WOULD BE HAVE TO
BE SOMETHING THAT WOULD BE
PRIORITIZED THROUGH PARKS
REALLY MORE SO THAN BECAUSE THE
THE PARK THE SIDEWALK VILLAGE
WOULDN'T BE WOULDN'T BE PAYING
FOR THAT NOW IF WE WERE GOING
TO BE BUILDING SIDEWALKS ON THE
EAST SIDE OF THAT ROAD THAT
WOULD BE STORY.
>> SO.
ALL RIGHT, PETER, I'VE GOT A
QUESTION ABOUT HOW WE KNOW WHEN
IT'S TIME TO REPLACE A
PARTICULAR PIECE OF CURB
WATCHED BY SENATORS WHEN THEY
WERE DOING AND SEEMED LIKE THEY
DUG UP SOME PIECES OF CURB THAT
WE'RE NOT IN BAD SHAPE AND LEFT
SOME THAT WE'RE IN BAD SHAPE.
AND AS A AS A RESIDENT WATCHING
THAT I WAS NEVER SURE LIKE YOU
WANT ME TO POINT THAT OUT NOW I
DON'T WANT TO NECESSARILY BE
FOLLOWING ALONG BEHIND YOU GUYS
AND SAYING YOU MISSED ONE BUT
THERE WERE A FEW INSTANCES
WHERE I DID.
>> SO WHAT'S OUR STANDARD FOR
HOW BAD IS BAD ENOUGH TO DECIDE
THAT WE'RE GOING TO REPLACE
CURB?
>> WELL, THERE'S A LOT
OF THERE'S SOME DIFFERENT
FACTORS THAT GO INTO THAT
GENERALLY SPEAKING, WE'RE
TRYING TO MAKE OUR ROAD DOLLARS
STRETCH AS FAR AS WE POSSIBLY
CAN SO WE ARE TRYING TO LIMIT
THE AMOUNT OF CURVE THAT WE
REMOVE AND REPLACE ON THESE
RESURFACING PROJECTS ESPECIALLY
WITHIN THE NEIGHBORHOODS I
CAN'T SAY EXACTLY ON A CHURCH
HOW MUCH EACH INDIVIDUAL PIECE
OF CURB WAS DETERMINED ON THAT.
BUT IN GENERAL, YOU KNOW, IF
THE IF THE CURB IS FUNCTIONAL,
IF IT IF IF IT'S THE MAIN
PURPOSE OF THE CURB IS TO DRAIN
THE STORM RUNOFF THAT COMES OFF
THE ROAD AND IF IT'S
FUNCTIONING FOR THAT PURPOSE
THEN WE WILL OFTEN LEAVE IT
ALONE.
SOMETIMES THEY'RE DISINTEGRATED
JUST TO THE POINT WHERE THE
CURB IS BARELY EVEN THERE
ANYMORE AND THAT'S OBVIOUSLY
GOING TO GET REPLACED.
BUT SOMETIMES THE REPLACEMENTS
ARE DONE MORE FOR MAINTAINING
DRAINAGE THAN THEY ARE FOR JUST
THE CONDITION OF THE CONCRETE
ITSELF.
OK, WELL I GUESS I WOULD I'D
LIKE TO HEAR A STANDARD THAT'S
SOMETHING A CRACK THAT'S LONGER
THAN X OR WIDER AND Y OR A
PERCENTAGE OF THE CURVE THAT IS
DISINTEGRATED OR FOR A CURVE
HAS SUNK MORE THAN X INCHES
LIKE THESE ARE THE KINDS
OF STANDARDS THAT I WOULD LIKE
TO SEE APPLIED TO A CURB AND I
GUESS I'D ALSO LIKE TO OFFER UP
MY EXPERIENCE AS A ROAD USER
THAT THERE'S TWO OTHER THINGS
THAT I COUNT ON CURBS TO DO AND
ONE OF THEM IS THEY'RE THE
SURFACE THAT'S IMMEDIATELY
ADJACENT TO WHERE I'M RIDING MY
BIKE IN THE BIKE LANE SO I WANT
THEM TO BE SMOOTH ENOUGH SO
THAT IF MY BIKE ENDS UP IN THEM
THAT I DON'T HAVE A WRECK.
AND THEN I ALSO APPRECIATE THAT
CURBS ACTS TO KEEP CARS WHERE
THEY BELONG IN THE STREET AND
OFF OF THE PLACES WHERE THEY
DON'T BELONG WHEN THINGS GO
WRONG.
SO THOSE ARE TWO OTHER
FUNCTIONS OF CURVES THAT I
THINK WE SHOULD BE CONSIDERING
BEYOND THE WATER DRAINAGE.
SO REASONS WHY I WOULD LIKE
CURVES THAT ARE IN GOOD
CONDITION SO ARE SO I WILL NOTE
I'M I'M QUITE PLEASED TO HEAR
ABOUT THE IMPROVEMENTS TO THE
INTERSECTION OF LAKE AND LAKE
VIEW.
THIS IS A NEIGHBORHOOD THAT IS
NEAR MY HOME AND THAT I TRAVEL
FREQUENTLY TAKING MY CHILD TO
SCHOOL AND YOU KNOW, I'VE
PERSONALLY OBSERVED QUITE A BIT
OF SOMETIMES CONFUSION WHEN YOU
HAVE TWO DRIVERS APPROACHING
THE HIGH LAKE JACKSON
INTERSECTION AND WHO GETS TO
MERGE WHERE SO THANK YOU FOR
THAT.
I'M WONDERING IF I KNOW THERE
ARE A NUMBER OF SIDEWALK GAPS
STILL REMAINING ON THE EAST
SIDE OF HIGH LAKE AND I'M
WONDERING IF ANY SIDEWALK GAP
FILLING HAD BEEN CONSIDERED FOR
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR AS RELATED
TO THIS PROJECT SEPARATELY.
>> YEAH WE DID WE DID LOOK AT
THAT AND I DON'T KNOW HOW MUCH
YOU KNOW ABOUT OUR OUR SYSTEM
FOR DEVELOPING FOR DETERMINING
SIDEWALK GAPS BUT WE DO HAVE A
PRIORITIZATION SYSTEM GENERALLY
THEY DID NOT SCORE VERY HIGH IN
THIS NEIGHBORHOOD AND WE
TYPICALLY WE WOULD BE LOOKING
AT THEM BEING OVER A CERTAIN
THRESHOLD BEFORE WE CONSIDER
INCLUDING THE PROJECT AND
UNFORTUNATELY THE ONES IN THIS
AREA DIDN'T WE?
I THINK IT'S ALONG THERE'S ONE
GAP LONG GRAY LAKE THAT WHILE
IT DIDN'T SCORE VERY HIGH WAS
THE ONLY GAP ALONG THERE AND
THAT'S THAT'S THE MAIN ROUTE
INTO THE SCHOOL.
IT WAS A LOW COST THING.
SO WE DID ADD WE ARE ADDING A
LITTLE BIT OF RAIN ALONG THERE
BUT AGAIN IT COMES DOWN TO
WE'VE ONLY GOT SO MUCH MONEY
AND WE HAVE TO PRIORITIZE WHERE
WE'RE SPENDING IT.
SO THE A LOT OF THE SIDEWALK
GAPS HERE DIDN'T JUST GET UP
OF THAT THRESHOLD.
>> OK, THANK YOU
ON THIS, NICK
.
THE THE THE EYE SHAPED WEDGES
SPLITTING THE CITY INTO I THINK
EIGHT SEGMENTS IS THAT A FAIRLY
NEW WAY THAT YOU GUYS HAVE
ORGANIZED THE NEIGHBORHOOD
STREET RESURFACING PROGRAM IN
THE GRAND SCHEME OF THINGS I
WOULD SAY IT'S RELATIVELY NEW.
I THINK WE'VE BEEN USING THAT
SYSTEM FOR MAYBE THE LAST FOUR
OR FIVE YEARS AROUND MAYBE A
LITTLE BIT LONGER THAN THAT
FIVE OR SIX YEARS MAYBE I DON'T
REMEMBER EXACTLY WHEN IT WAS
DEVELOPED BUT WE'RE ACTUALLY IN
THE PROCESS OF SUMMER
REDEVELOPING THAT EXCUSE ME AND
WE'RE LOOKING TO GIVE IT A
LITTLE BIT MORE GRANULARITY AND
ACTUALLY BREAK THOSE AREAS DOWN
INTO SMALLER DIVISIONS SO THAT
WHEN WE GO TO DETERMINE AN AREA
AND SAY HEY, YOU KNOW IN TWENTY
TWENTY SEVEN WE'RE GOING TO BE
IN THIS AREA RIGHT HERE IT'S A
LITTLE BIT MORE TIGHTER.
SO THE EXPECTATIONS OF LIKE OH
YEAH THERE REALLY IS A CHANCE
THAT THEY'RE GOING TO BE IN
THIS AREA AS YOU CAN SEE, YOU
KNOW WHAT WE CAN AFFORD TO DO
THIS YEAR IS MOST LAKEVIEW
NEIGHBORHOOD.
THERE'S A VERY SMALL PERCENTAGE
OF THE CITY.
SO WE ARE WE ARE WORKING ON
THAT TO TRY TO GET A MAP THAT'S
MAYBE A LITTLE BIT MORE
INFORMATIVE INTO THE FUTURE.
OK, THANKS.
YEAH, I JUST WANTED TO KIND
OF ADDRESS PEOPLE'S QUESTIONS
ABOUT IF THERE'S EIGHT SEGMENTS
THEN THEORETICALLY EVERY EIGHT
YEARS MY NEIGHBORHOOD SHOULD
HAVE BEEN CONSIDERED BUT IT
HASN'T BEEN FOR DECADES AND SO
RIGHT.
YEAH I WANTED TO GET THAT OUT
THERE THAT THEY'RE ON FOR.
YEAH I THINK THE NEW I THINK
THE NEW SYSTEM ONCE WE DEVELOP
WILL BE IT WILL HAVE LIKE
SIXTEEN DIVISIONS INSTEAD
OF EIGHT SO WHICH IS MORE
REALISTIC.
>> MAYBE ANOTHER AGENDA TOPIC
THAT RAYMOND KEEP IN MIND.
RIGHT THANKS.
ANY OTHER QUESTIONS COMMENTS.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WELL THANKS EVERYBODY.
THANKS AS ALWAYS FOR THIS
PRESENTATION.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
WHENEVER YOU'RE ALL RIGHT.
NEXT UP IS SIGNALIZED
INTERSECTIONS AND NON MOTORIZED
USERS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
ANNUAL WORK PROGRAM THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
REQUESTED A PRESENTATION BY
STAFF ON WHAT CONSIDERATIONS
AND ACCOMMODATIONS ARE MADE FOR
PEDESTRIANS AND BICYCLISTS AT
SIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS.
SO LUKLA WILL GIVE AN OVERVIEW
OF THIS TOPIC AND THEN ANSWER
QUESTIONS FROM THE COMMISSION.
LUKE, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME FOR THOSE COMMISSIONERS
I HAVEN'T MET BEFORE THE
BROADER AUDIENCE I'M PART
OF ENGINEERING AND ONE OF THE
TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERS WITH A
CITY AND I DO SPEND A GOOD
PORTION OF MY WORK TIME WITH
TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND I REPORT TO
RAYMOND HESS.
SO TODAY WILL TAKE A LOOK AT A
GENERAL OVERVIEW OF PEDESTRIAN
AND SERVICES AT SIGNALIZED
INTERSECTIONS THIS PRESENTATION
HAS THIS FIVE SECTIONS MARKED
CROSSWALKS AND DIAGRAMS SHOWING
CONFLICTING MOVEMENTS AND A
SAFETY TO PERFORMANCE.
THE FIRST THREE ARE TOGETHER
JUST A COUPLE OF SLIDES AND
THEN THE BULK OF THE
PRESENTATION WILL BE FOCUSING
EXISTING PRACTICE IN THE CITY
AND THE LAST LINE WILL TAKE A
LOOK AT THE FUTURE WORK.
THAT'S OUR WORK PLAN FOR MARK
THE CROSSWALKS THE FIRST KIND
IS AN UNCONTROLLED CROSSING WAS
SHOWN ON THE RIGHT.
THE TOP PICTURE IS A
MILBLOG
CROSSING.
THIS IS ON FLETCHER
.
>> IT'S A MARKED CROSSWALK WAS
CROSSWALK SIGNAGE AT THIS
LOCATION THERE IS REALLY NOT A
TURNING MOVEMENT BETWEEN MOTOR
VEHICLES AND PEDESTRIANS.
THE BOTTOM HALF OF THE SLIDE
SHOWS A PICTURE THAT IS A STOP
CONTROLLED INTERSECTION.
SO AT THIS INTERSECTION THERE
IS ALWAYS STOP CONTROL SO AND
THERE THERE THIS CONDITION
MOTOR VEHICLE DRIVERS ARE
REQUIRED TO STOP AT THE
INTERSECTION AND ONLY PROCEED
WHEN IT'S THAT USERS TURN AND
THERE'S NOT A CONFLICT IN THE
CROSSWALK MOVING ON TO THE NEXT
SLIDE ON THE TOP WE HAVE A
PICTURE SHOWING AN RFP WHICH
STANDS FOR RECTANGULAR RAPID
FLASHING BEACON.
SO THIS IS A MYTH BLOCK
CROSSWALK ALONG YOUR OWN
PARKWAY.
IT'S ON THE EAST SIDE OF HERE
ON HIGH SCHOOL.
THIS ONE IS RFP EQUIPPED
CROSSWALK.
THERE IS REALLY NOT A CONFLICT
BETWEEN ATTORNEY AND MOTOR
VEHICLE AND PEDESTRIAN.
THE BOTTOM OF THIS SLIDE IS
SHOWING A TRAFFIC SIGNAL EQUIP
INTERSECTION SO THIS
INTERSECTION WE DO HAVE A MAP
OF THE CROSSWALK AND ALSO
TURNING VEHICLES IN THIS CASE
WOULD BE CONTROLLED BY TRAFFIC
SIGNAL BEFORE IT CAN CLEAR THE
INTERSECTION IN THE NEXT SLIDE
WE THIS IS THIS INTERSECTION
SHOW ON THE SCREEN IS
EISENHOWER AND NORTHBROOK AT
THIS INTERSECTION WE DO HAVE
OUR IFB FOR ALL THE CROSSINGS
FOR CROSSING EISENHAUER SO THIS
IS A TYPE SO THIS IS A TYPE
OF CONTROL WHERE THE
INTERSECTION IS UNDER A SIGN
CONTROL.
THEN THE LEFT TURN DRIVER WILL
STILL NEED TO YIELD TO
PEDESTRIANS IN THE IN THE
CROSSWALK.
NEXT WE'LL TAKE A LOOK AT A
COUPLE OF DIAGRAMS SHOWING THE
TYPE OF CONFLICT BETWEEN
TURNING VEHICLES AND
PEDESTRIANS USERS AND THE
BICYCLE USERS SO THIS SLIDE THE
RIGHT HALF OF THE SLIDE IS
SHOWING A DIAGRAM WITH A LEFT
TURNING MOTOR VEHICLE AND THE
RIGHT TURNING MOTOR VEHICLE IN
THE FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OF THE
DRIVER OF THE LEFT TURNING
VEHICLE, THE THE POTENTIAL
CONFLICT IS WITH THE OPPOSING
THROUGH TRAFFIC WHICH IS NOT
SHOW ON THIS CHART AND WHAT'S
MARKED ON THE CHART IS THE
CONFLICT POINT BETWEEN THE
TERNIUM VEHICLE AND THE BICYCLE
USER AND ALSO THE PEDESTRIAN
USER THE IN THE CROSSWALK THE
THIS DIAGRAM ALSO SHOWS A
RETURNING VEHICLE AND THE
POTENTIAL CONFLICT POINTS WITH
BICYCLE USERS IN THE BIKE LANE
AND PEDESTRIAN USERS IN THE IN
THE CROSSWALK.
SO THIS IS FROM THE VIEW
OF MOTOR VEHICLE DRIVERS FROM
THE VIEW.
NOW WE'RE MOVING ON TO THE NEXT
SLIDE FROM THE VIEW OF THAT
MOTORIZED USERS.
THE POTENTIAL CONFLICT DOES
COME FROM BOTH THE LEFT BURNING
VEHICLE AND THE RETURNING
VEHICLE.
SO IF WE TAKE A LOOK AT THE
DIAGRAM SHOWN HERE FOR THE SAME
PEDESTRIAN IN THE CROSSWALK,
THERE IS CONFLICT FROM THE LEFT
TURNING VEHICLE AND RETURNING
VEHICLE.
THE SAME IS FOR THE BICYCLE
USERS.
THEN WE'LL MOVE ON TO TAKE A
QUICK OF THE SAFETY PERFORMANCE
OF OUR SYSTEM.
>> SO WE SCANNED CRASH DATA,
REPORTED CRASH DATA FROM THE
BEGINNING OF 2014.
SO THIS THIS DATASET COVERS
SLIGHTLY OVER 10 YEARS WORTH
OF REPORTED CRASH THAT WE FIRST
FILTERED FOR FATELE AND ELAVIL
OR SERIOUS INJURY CRASHES THAT
INVOLVE PEDESTRIAN USERS
ALTOGETHER FOR THIS PERIOD WE
WE HAVE 12 FATAL CRASHES AND TO
A LEVEL INJURY CRASHES THEN
FOUR FOR THE INTEREST OF THIS
TOPIC WE HAVE FURTHER SCREENED
THOSE CRASHES FOR THOSE THAT
ONLY INVOLVE A TURNING MOTOR
VEHICLE AT SIGNALIZED
INTERSECTION.
SO IN THIS CASE WE COME DOWN TO
ONE FATAL CRASH AND 16 A LEVEL
INJURY CRASH.
THEN THERE IS SOME MORE SIGNAL
RELATED TECHNICAL TERMS HERE
THAT'S PERMISSIBLE ONLY.
SO THE ONE FATAL PEDESTRIAN
INVOLVED CRASH AT SIMONIZE
INTERSECTION WAS THE MOTOR
VEHICLE WAS UNDER PROMISE
OF ONLY MODE MEANING IT
REQUIRES THE DRIVER TO OBSERVE
AND YIELD TO THE PEDESTRIAN IN
THE CROSSWALK AND THE FOR THE
16 ELAVIL INJURY CRASHES, 14
OF THOSE ARE UNDER PERMISSIVE
ONLY SERVICE AND TWO OF THOSE
ARE UNDER PERMISSIVE AND
PROTECTED MODE MEANING FOR ONE
SIGNAL CYCLE A PORTION OF THE
SIGNAL CYCLE REQUIRES DRIVER TO
YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN THE
CROSSWALK AND FOR ANOTHER
PORTION OF THE CYCLE THE DRIVER
IS PROVIDED WITH A PROTECTED
TRAINING DURATION WHERE THE
DRIVER JUST NEEDS TO FOLLOW THE
SIGNAL INDICATION OF COURSE FOR
ANY REASON IF THERE IS NO ICE
USERS IN THE IN THE VEHICLE'S
PATH THE DRIVERS STILL YIELD TO
THE ANOMALOCARIS USER.
>> I HAD JUST MOVED ON TO THE
NEXT SLIDE.
THIS IS A VERY SIMILAR TO THE
PREVIOUS SLIDE.
THE DIFFERENCE IS THAT IN THIS
SLIDE WE'RE LOOKING AT A
BICYCLE, A BICYCLE USER
SEAMOUNT CRASHES THE SAME DATA
COLLECTION PERIOD ANOTHER BIT
OVER TEN YEARS THERE WERE A
TOTAL OF FIVE FATAL CRASHES
INVOLVING BICYCLE USERS AND THE
THIRTY SIX CRASHES INVOLVED
ELAVIL INJURIES TO THE BICYCLE
USERS.
WHEN WE SCREEN THIS GROUP
OF CRASHES TO TWO TO THOSE
INVOLVING MOTOR VEHICLES
TURNING AT SIGNALIZED
INTERSECTION, THERE WAS NOT A
FATAL LEVEL CRASH AND FOR
ALLOWABLE INJURIES THERE ARE
FIVE CRASHES.
THREE OF THOSE INVOLVED
PERMISSIVE ONLY SIGNAL
TREATMENT AND TWO OF THOSE
INVOLVED PERMISSIVE AND
PROTECTED TREATMENT.
>> I'M GOING TO MOVE ON TO THE
NEXT SLIDE.
THIS IS WHERE WE START LOOKING
INTO THE EXISTING PRACTICE OUR
SYSTEM THIS SLIDE SHOWS
PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL EQUIPMENT AND
HOW WE OPERATE THESE EQUIPMENT
FOR EQUIPMENT FIRST WHEN
THERE'S AT A CROSSWALK OR AT AN
INTERSECTION AT THE
INTERSECTION THAT DOES NOT HAVE
MARKED CROSSWALK AT THESE
LOCATIONS.
THERE'S NO PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL
PROVIDED THEN FOR LOCATIONS OR
WITH MARKED CROSSWALK.
WE DO HAVE PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS.
WE ALSO HAVE LOCATIONS WHERE WE
HAVE NO PUSHBUTTONS IF THERE IS
NO PEDESTRIAN PUSH-BUTTON
PEDESTRIAN SERVICE MUST BE
AUTOMATIC THEN WE HAVE
INTERSECTIONS WAVES WITH WITH
PUSH BUTTONS FOR THIS GROUP
THERE ARE TWO KINDS FOR SOME
INTERSECTIONS WE HAVE THE APPS
WHICH IS ACCESSIBLE PEDESTRIANS
SIGNAL AND SOME OTHER
CROSSWALKS WE HAVE NONE APPS
VERSIONS OF THE PUSHBUTTON FOR
AN INTERSECTION FOR A GIVEN
INTERSECTION AND EITHER I'LL
PUSH BUTTONS ARE APPS OR
THEY'RE ALL NON APPS.
THERE'S REALLY NOT A MIX
OF THESE BUTTONS AT ONE GIVEN
LOCATION AS TO THE OPERATIONS
OF PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS SOME
PARAMETERS THAT'S ON OUR RADAR
IS WHETHER THE PEDESTRIAN
INTERVALS ARE AUTOMATICALLY
RECALLED OR THEY REQUIRE USER
ACTIVATION.
ANOTHER PARAMETER IS LEADING
PEDESTRIAN INTERVALE LEADING
PEDESTRIAN INTERVALE MEANS
PEDESTRIAN WALK INDICATION IS
GIVEN A FEW SECONDS BEFORE THE
PARALLEL MOTOR VEHICLE
INDICATION IS GIVEN A GREEN SO
THAT DOES ALLOW THE PEDESTRIAN
USERS TO START CROSSING
WALLABY'S SOONER SO THAT THEIR
VISIBILITY IS ENHANCED FOR
APPROACHING DRIVERS.
A THIRD PARAMETER FOR
PEDESTRIAN OPERATIONS IS THE
EXCLUSIVE PEDESTRIAN PHASE ALSO
KNOWN AS PEDESTRIAN SCRAMBLE OR
BAR STANDS MEETS START
DEPLOYING EXCLUSIVE PEDESTRIAN
PHASE AT THREE INTERSECTIONS
ALONG STATE STREET.
BETWEEN FROM THE THREE
LOCATIONS ARE STATE STREET AT
WILLIAM NORTH UNIVERSITY AND
LIBERTY.
THEN WE'LL TAKE A LOOK AT SOME
FIELD EXAMPLES.
SO WHEN I PREPARE FOR THIS
PRESENTATION IN A WAY
INTERSECTION CAME TO MIND
THAT'S GOING TO SHOW UP A
COUPLE OF TIMES IN THIS
PRESENTATION IS EISENHAUER AND
THIS INDUSTRIAL FIRST THAT WE
USE THIS INTERSECTION TO
DEMONSTRATE MARKED CROSSWALK
AND NONMARKET CROSSWALK FOR THE
LAST LEG MARKED AS THE RED
FRAME IN THIS SLIDE THAT'S THE
WEST LEG OF THE INTERSECTION.
IT DOES NOT REALLY HAVE MARKED
A CROSSWALK.
THERE'S NO CURB RAMP SO THERE'S
NO PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL FOR THIS
CROSSING THEN FOR THE OTHER
THREE LEGS THEY'RE MARKED WITH
GREEN FRAMES THAT ARE MARKED UP
CROSSWALKS CURB RAMPS AND
PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS THAT ARE
ALSO PUSHBUTTONS FOR THESE
CROSSINGS.
>> OK, ON THE NEXT SLIDE WE'LL
TAKE A LOOK AT LEFT TURN SIGNAL
EQUIPMENT AND HOW THE LEFT TURN
SIGNAL EQUIPMENT ARE OPERATED
ON THE LEFT SIDE OF THIS SLIDE.
I'M SHOWING THREE POSSIBLE
SIGNAL CONFIGURATION AND FOR
LEFT TURN MOVEMENT THERE ARE
LABELED ABCDS FOUR FOR OPTION A
THIS IS REALLY A THREE SECTION
CIRCULAR TRAFFIC SIGNAL RED,
YELLOW AND GREEN.
THIS IS NOT READY FOR A LEFT
TURN SIGNAL.
THIS IS FOR THROUGH MOVEMENT
BUT I PLACES HERE TO AS AS SOME
INTERSECTIONS THEY DO NOT HAVE
A SPECIFIC OR DEDICATED LEFT
TURN SIGNAL.
SO IN THOSE CASES USERS WILL
FOLLOW THE INDICATION THAT'S
SPECIFIC FOR THROUGH MOVEMENT
AND IN THIS CASE ON THE RIGHT
HAND SIDE OF THE SLIDE THE
LABELS A BIG CORRESPOND TO THE
SAME LABEL ON THE LEFT SIDE AND
FOR OPERATIONS THESE LABELS
ALSO CORRESPOND TO EACH OTHER
SO WAS LABEL A THIS OPTION?
THERE IS NO DEDICATED SIGNAL
THAN THE TYPE OF OPERATIONS IS
PERMISSIBLE ONLY NOW WE MOVE ON
TO TALK ABOUT OPTION B HERE FOR
OPTION B IT'S ALSO A THREE
SECTION TRAFFIC SIGNAL ASSEMBLY
.
IN THIS CASE THE COLUMN STAYS
THE SAME RIGHT ON TOP YETTO IN
THE MIDDLE ON THE BOTTOM AND
THE THE SHAPE OF THE LINES ARE
ALL ARROWS.
THEY ARE POINTING TO THE LEFT
IN THIS CASE WE CALL THIS THE
THREE SECTION LEFT TURN SIGNAL
FOR OPERATIONS.
THIS TYPE OF SIGNAL EQUIPMENT
IS TIED TO A PROTECTED ONLY
TURNING MOVEMENT.
WE'LL HAVE OTHER SLIDES LATER
ON TO GO THROUGH THE DETAILS
OF HOW THE PERMISSIVE AND
PROTAGONISM MODE IS HOW THEY
ARE GOING TO WORK, MOVE ON TO
TALK ABOUT OPTION C HERE.
IN THIS CASE THE SIGNAL
ASSEMBLY HAS FOUR SECTIONS.
THE TOP THREE ARE THE SAME AS
THE CIRCULAR OPTION A. THERE
THE ADDITION IS THAT AT THE
BOTTOM OF THE THREE SECTION
THERE IS A FOURTH SECTION
BEFORE SECTION IS A GREEN ARROW
POINTING TO THE LEFT WE CALL
THIS OPTION THE FOURTH I WILL
GREEN SIGNAL WAS THIS SIGNALING
EQUIPMENT IT CAN BE PERMISSIVE
AND PROTECTED OPERATIONS FOR
THE LEFT TURN.
IT CAN ALSO BE PROTECTED ONLY
THE LAST OPTION FOR LEFT HAND
SIGNAL LABELED LETTER D HERE IN
THIS CASE IT'S FOR SECTION
CELMO ASSEMBLY SOLID RED ARROW
ON THE TOP AND THE TWO YELLOW
ARROWS IN THE MIDDLE AND THE
ONE SOLID GREEN ARROW AT THE
BOTTOM.
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN TWO
YELLOW ARROWS THE THE SECOND
ONE FROM THE TOP IS A STEADY
YELLOW AND THE THIRD ONE FROM
THE TOP IS FLASHING HERE.
SO WE STARTED DEPLOYING THE
THIS TYPE OF TREATMENT AND OUR
INTERSECTIONS FROM A FEW YEARS
BACK THIS THIS AFTERNOON SIGNAL
DOES ALLOW PERMITTING AND
PROTECTING MODE FOUR FOR THE
LEFT TURN MOVEMENT.
>> WE CALL THIS THE FLASHING
YELLOW ARROW SIGNAL HERE.
>> SO AMOUNT OF THESE OPTIONS
SOME OF THEM ARE CAPABLE
OF MEETING THE PERMISSIVE
DURATION.
SOME OTHERS ARE NOT CAPABLE
OF DOING THAT IN THE NEXT FEW
SLIDES WE'RE GOING TO TAKE A
LOOK AT THAT SO THE REASON I
MENTIONED THE INTERSECTION
OF EISENHAUER AND INDUSTRIAL IS
THAT IT HAS QUITE A FEW
COMBINATIONS OF A LOT OF THE
LEFT TURN TREATMENTS AT ONE
LOCATION.
TYPICALLY THAT'S NOT THE CASE.
TYPICALLY WE MAY HAVE ALL THE
LEFT TURNS BEING PERMISSIVE OR
SOME OF THOSE BEING PROTECTED.
BUT THIS INTERSECTION DOES HAVE
THE COMBINATION OF THREE
OPTIONS HERE.
SO NOW SO WE'LL USE THIS ONE AS
AS THE EXAMPLE OK, NEXT SLIDE
WE'LL FIRST TAKE A LOOK AT
INTERSECTIONS THAT DOES NOT
HAVE THAT YOU TAKE A LEFT TURN
SIGNAL IN THIS CASE THE RIGHT
HAND SIDE HAS TO DIAGRAMS
SHOWING DIFFERENT SIGNAL
INDICATIONS SIGNAL CYCLE.
THE TOP ONE SHOWS THAT MOTOR
VEHICLE INDICATION IS RED AND
THE PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL IS SOLID
DO NOT WALK.
SO IN THIS CASE NO USERS FROM
THIS APPROACH IS SERVICED AND
THEY NEED TO WAIT AT THE
INTERSECTION FOR THE MOMENT
THEY THERE THEY RECEIVE THEIR
INDICATIONS OR THEIR WALK OR
GREEN INDICATIONS THE BOTTOM
THE BOTTOM DIAGRAM ON THIS
SLIDE SHOWS THAT MOTOR VEHICLE
INDICATIONS TURNED GREEN AND
PEDESTRIAN INDICATION TURN WALK
.
SO IN THIS CASE THERE'S REALLY
NOT A LEFT TURN SPECIFIC
TRAFFIC SIGNAL LEFT TURN
DRIVERS WILL NEED TO YIELD TO
THE OPPOSING THROUGH TRAFFIC
RETURNING TRAFFIC AND ALSO
USERS IN THE BICYCLE AND
CROSSWALK.
>> MANY OF OUR DOWNTOWN
INTERSECTIONS HAVE THIS TYPE
OF CONFIGURATION AND THERE ARE
CERTAIN INTERSECTION AS ALONG
OUR COMMUTING CORRIDORS ALSO
HAVE THE SAME SET OF MOVING ON
TO THE NEXT SLIDE WHICH IS JUST
ONE ADDITION TO THE PREVIOUS
ONE TO INDICATE HOW THE LEADING
PEDESTRIAN INNER WILL WORKS
HERE COMPARED TO THE PREVIOUS
SLIDE WE HAVE INSERTED ANOTHER
ONE IN THE MIDDLE SO THE MIDDLE
SLIDE SHOWS THAT WELL MOTOR
VEHICLE INDICATIONS STATES ARE
RED.
WE DO HAVE THE PEDESTRIAN
INDICATION SHOWING A WALK.
SO IN THIS CASE THIS IS THIS
INDICATE THIS COMBINATION IS
ONLY PRESENT AT THE
INTERSECTION FOR A FEW SECONDS,
NAMELY THREE TO FIVE SECONDS.
THE IDEA IS TO GET THE
PEDESTRIAN INTO THE CROSSWALK
SO THERE ARE MORE VISIBLE TO
TURNING MOTOR VEHICLES SO
THAT'S THE API HERE.
THE CITY IMPLEMENT THE API
DURING THE PANDEMIC AT ALL CITY
INTERSECTIONS OR CITY
OF SIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS.
THERE ARE A COUPLE AND THAT
INTERSECTIONS THROUGH A
DIFFERENT PROJECT WE NEED TO
REQUEST AND RECEIVE APPROVAL TO
TO INSTALL MEDIAN PEDESTRIAN OR
AT SEVERAL INTERSECTIONS.
SO IN THE IN THE FOLLOWING
SLIDES LIKE THE PRESENTATION
ONE NOT SPECIFIC SHOW LPI EVEN
THOUGH THEY DO EXIST AT OUR
INTERSECTIONS.
SO THIS IS A FIELD EXAMPLE
SHOWING LEFT HER MOVEMENTS THAT
ARE ALL PERMISSIBLE ONLY.
>> SO THIS PICTURE SHOWS AN
OVERVIEW OF THE INTERSECTION
OF PACARD AND THE FERNWOOD AT
THE BOTTOM THERE'S A SCREENSHOT
OF THE STREET VIEW OF THE SAME
INTERSECTION THE CAMERA IS
LOOKING EAST SO THERE'S AN
EASTBOUND APPROACH.
>> YEAH, JUST AS STRONG HERE.
THE SIGNAL INDICATIONS ARE FOR
THE THROUGH MOVEMENT ONLY AND
THE LEFT HAND VEHICLE IS AFTER
DRIVERS.
THEN YOU CAN OBSERVE THE
THROUGH MOVEMENT SIGNAL
INDICATOR AND YIELD TO OPPOSING
MOTOR VEHICLES AS WELL AS THE
MOTORIZED USERS IN THE
CROSSWALK AND THE BICYCLE LANE
THAT WILL MOVE ON TO TALK ABOUT
HOW LAUGHTER AND SIGNALS WORK
WHEN THE SIGNAL IS EQUIPPED
WITH THREE SECTION SIGNAL
ASSEMBLY.
IN THIS CASE THE TOP CHART
SHOWS THAT MOTOR VEHICLE
INDICATIONS WHETHER IT'S
THROUGH MOVEMENT OR LEFT HER
MOVEMENT THAT ARE RED AND THE
PEDESTRIANS SIGNAL IS STRONG
AND SOLID DO NOT WALK MOVING ON
TO THE NEXT DURATION OF THE
SIGNAL CYCLE THE LEFT TURN
MOTOR VEHICLE INDICATION IT
TURNS GREEN WHILE THE
PEDESTRIAN WALK INDICATE OR THE
PEDESTRIAN INDICATION STAYS
SOLID DO NOT WALK IN THIS CASE
IT'S A PROTECTED MOVEMENT FOR
THE LEFT TURNING VEHICLES
AS A
SIGNAL CYCLE GOES ON THE LEFT
TURNING SIGNAL INDICATION TURNS
RED AND THE THROUGH MOTOR
VEHICLE SIGNAL SHOWS GREEN AND
AND THE WALK INDICATION FOR IS
GIVEN TO PEDESTRIAN USERS SO
THAT THERE'S REALLY NOT A
CONFLICT BETWEEN PEDESTRIAN
USERS AND TURNING MOTOR
VEHICLES HERE AS TO FEEL THE
EXAMPLE WE COME BACK TO THE
INTERSECTION OF EISENHAUER AND
INDUSTRIAL THE WESTBOUND
APPROACH AND NORTHBOUND
APPROACH AT THIS INTERSECTION
THEY BOTH HAVE THE THREE
SECTIONS SIGNAL HAD THEY
RECEIVE THE PROTECTED ONLY
TREATMENT.
>> THEN WE MOVE ON TO TALK
ABOUT THE LEFT TURN SIGNAL
WHISTLE WITH THE FOURTH LEVEL
GREEN ARROW SO WE HAVE THREE
CARS ON THE ON THE RIGHT HAND
SIDE TO SHOW THE SEQUENCE
OF THE SIGNAL CHANGES IN THE
SIGNAL CYCLE IN THIS CASE WHEN
MOTOR VEHICLE INDICATION TURNS
GREEN PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL ALSO
TURNS A WALK.
>> SO IN THIS CASE THE LEFT
TURN MOTOR VEHICLES THEY NEED
TO YIELD TO PEDESTRIAN AND
BICYCLISTS ADDED THE NEXT PHASE
OF THE SIGNAL CYCLE.
>> THE PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL TURNS
TO A SOLID DO NOT WALK AND THE
THE FOURTH LEVEL GREEN ARROW
LIGHTS UP TO INDICATE IT IS A
PROTECTED PORTION OF OF A
MOVEMENT.
SO IN THIS CASE THE FIRST LEVEL
GREEN ARROW, IT CAN BE OPERATED
EITHER PROTECTED ONLY MODE OR
IT CAN BE OPERATED IN
PERMISSIVE AND PROTECTED MODE
DEPENDS ON HOW THE INTERSECTION
IS CONFIGURED IN THIS CASE
DRIVERS NEED TO FOLLOW A SIGNAL
INDICATION AND ALSO YIELD TO
PEDESTRIANS AND THERE IS A ONE
LIMIT IS THAT THIS THE LEFT
TURN SIGNAL CONFIGURATION
CANNOT OMIT THE PERMISSIVE
PORTION FOR THE LEFT TURN.
>> THEN AS TO FOLLOW THE
EXAMPLE WE COME BACK TO
EISENHOWER AND INDUSTRIAL.
IN THIS CASE THE STYLIST
APPROACH IS EQUIPPED WITH THE
FOURTH LEVEL GREEN ARROW AT
THIS INTERSECTION IS OPERATED
IN A PROTECTED ONLY MODE.
THEN WE MOVE ON TO TAKE A LOOK
AT FLASHING ARROW LEFT TURN
ASSEMBLY IN THIS CASE WHEN THE
SIGNAL WHEN SOME SIGNAL ON THE
APPROACH TURN GREEN OR WALK
VEHICLE INDICATION RECEIVES A
GREEN INDICATION WALK OR
PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL RECEIVES A
WALK INDICATION AND THE LEFT
TURN SIGNAL GOES TO FLASHING
YELLOW INDICATING THIS IS A
PERMISSIVE PORTION OF OF THE
OF THE OPERATIONS THEN WILL BE
ON TO THE NEXT PHASE OF THE
CYCLE AFTER MOTOR VEHICLE
INDICATION IN TERMS RED AND
PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL TURNS TO A
SOLID DO NOT WALK THE LEFT TURN
MOVEMENT RECEIVE A GREEN ARROW
INDICATION FOR LEFT TURN SO WAS
THE FLASHING YELLOW ARROW
ASSEMBLY.
>> IT IS CAPABLE OF OF MEETING
THE PERMISSABLE PORTION AND
THEN WE WILL TAKE A LOOK AT
THAT NEXT ON A FIELD EXAMPLE
OF FLASHING YELLOW ARROW COMING
BACK TO EISENHOWER AND
INDUSTRIAL THE EASTBOUND LEFT
TURN MOVEMENT HAS THIS SIGNAL
ASSEMBLY MOVING ON TO THE NEXT
SLIDE.
>> THIS PLAN SHOWS SHOWS HOW
THE SIGNAL WORKS WHEN THE
THAT'S ALSO WAS FLASHING YELLOW
ARROW BUT THE CAPABILITY FOR
AUTOMATING THE PERMITS PORTION
IS TURNING IN THIS CASE THE TOP
CHART SHOWS THAT MOTOR VEHICLE
SIGNAL INDICATIONS ARE ALL RED
AND PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL
INDICATION ARE ALL SOLID.
>> DO NOT WALK AS THE SIGNAL
CYCLE GOES.
THERE ARE TWO OPTIONS HERE
EITHER TWO OR NUMBER TWO OR
NUMBER THREE DEPENDS ON IF
THERE IS A PEDESTRIAN ACTUATION
REQUESTING PEDESTRIAN SERVICE.
THE ONE ON THE LEFT IS SHOWING
THAT WHEN PEDESTRIAN IS PRESENT
AT THE INTERSECTION REQUESTING
THE SERVICE, THE PEDESTRIAN
SIGNAL DISPLAYS A WALKING
INDICATION.
IN THIS CASE THE LEFT TURN
MOTOR VEHICLE SIGNAL STAYS RED
AND ON THE RIGHT HAND SIDE IS
SHOWS THE OPTION THAT WHEN NO
PUSH BUTTON IS ACTIVATED IN
THIS CASE THE PERMISSIVE
PORTION OF THE LEFT TURN IS
DISPLAYED.
DRIVERS ARE ALLOWED TO MAKE A
LEFT TURN AFTER THIS DURATION
IS COMPLETE.
THE NEXT SIGNAL PHASE IS
PROTECTED ONLY PORTION FOR THE
LEFT HAND MOVEMENT.
THERE IS ONE CONSIDERATION HERE
WHILE WE DO HAVE THE CAPABILITY
TO OMIT THE FLASHING YELLOW
ARROW OR THE PERMISSIVE PORTION
OF THE LEFT TURN, WE DO NEED TO
CONSIDER WHETHER THE CROSSWALK
SIGNAL IS AUTOMATICALLY
SERVICED IF WE RECALL THAT
SURVEYS MEANING THERE IS
AUTOMATIC SERVICE TERRACYCLE
THEN EFFECTIVELY THAT'S MEETING
THE FLASHING YELLOW ARROW IN
ALL THE SIGNAL SIPOS IT'S VERY
POSSIBLE THE FLASHING YELLOW
WILL NEVER SHOW AN EXAMPLE
OF THIS OPERATION.
THIS IS THE INTERSECTION
OF MAIN STADIUM.
SO ON THIS ON THIS SLIDE WE DO
HAVE THE SIGNAL HAD FOR THE
LEFT TURN STATION ALL RED AND
ON THE LEFT HAND SIDE WE SEE
THERE IS A PEDESTRIAN IN THE
CROSSWALK OK WE ARE NEAR THE
END OF THE PRESENTATION BEFORE
THAT WE TAKE A LOOK AT THE
BICYCLE SIGNAL RIGHT NOW THERE
ARE TWEENERS IN THE CITY
BOUNDARY.
BOTH OF THOSE ARE AND THERE
JURISDICTION FIRST AND HERE ON
DIFFERENT HERE.
SO WE DO HAVE BICYCLE SIGNALS
INSTALLED AT THESE TWO
INTERSECTIONS.
SO THE WAY THE BICYCLE SIGNAL
WORKS IS THAT THE THE BICYCLE
SIGNAL INDICATION AND THE
PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL THEY ARE
GOING TO FIRST SERVICE
SIMULTANEOUSLY MEANING BICYCLE
WILL RECEIVE A GREEN AND THE
PEDESTRIANS RECEIVE A WALK WELL
WITH A MOTOR VEHICLE INDICATION
STAYS STAYS RED.
THEN AFTER THIS PHASE THE
BICYCLE SIGNAL WOULD TURN TO
RED AND PEDESTRIAN USERS
CONTINUE TO RECEIVE A WALK AND
MOTOR VEHICLE INDICATION WILL
TURN GREEN.
SO THE REASON WE ARE IS
CONFIGURED THIS WAY IS THAT SO
ON THIS SLIDE ON THE LEFT HAND
SIDE IS SHOWING A DIAGRAM
OF CONFLICTING POINTS.
SO FOR THE LEFT TURN DRIVERS
TRYING TO MAKE A LEFT TURN AND
SO THIS INTERSECTION DOES HAVE
CLASSICAL TRACK MEANING THERE
ARE BIDIRECTIONAL BICYCLE USERS
ON ONE SIDE OF THE STREET.
SO IT'S POSSIBLE THAT WHILE THE
LEFT TURNING MOTOR VEHICLE
DRIVER IS OBSERVING FOR
OPPOSING THROUGH TRAFFIC AND
OTHER USERS COMING FROM THE
FRONT, THERE COULD BE ANOTHER
BICYCLE USER COMING FROM BEHIND
.
SO THE SIGNAL IS CONFIGURED IN
THIS CASE TO MITIGATE THIS
CONFLICT
AND IN THE CITY
STARTED FROM TWENTY SIXTEEN WE
STARTED TO INSTALL
HEMISPHERICAL VIDEO DETECTION
SYSTEMS.
WE FIRST TRIED THE FIRST SYSTEM
AT THE INTERSECTION OF THE MAIN
STADIUM TO MAKE SURE THE NEW
TECHNOLOGY IS IS SOUND BEFORE
WE EXPAND THIS FOOTPRINT OUR
FOR OUR EXPANDED DEPLOYMENT
STARTING AFTER TWO YEARS
OF TRIAL USE SO RIGHT NOW WE
HAVE FORTY EIGHT INTERSECTIONS
EQUIPPED WITH HEMISPHERICAL
VIDEO DETECTION SYSTEM.
THE ADVANTAGE OF THIS IS THAT
IT'S INSTALLED ON THE ROAD SIDE
SO THERE'S NOT ANY ELEMENT
OF THE SYSTEM THAT'S IN THE
PAVEMENT AND ALSO THE VIDEO
DETECTION SYSTEM CAN COVER CAN
DETECT BICYCLE USERS.
>> THERE IS OF DEVELOPMENT AT
THIS STAGE TO ALSO
COVER PEDESTRIAN USERS BUT THAT
PORTION IS NOT PROVEN TO BE
RELIABLE YET.
SO WE'RE PART OF THE EXPERIMENT
AND WE'LL BOTH DECIDE ON
WHETHER WHEN TIME IS RIGHT AND
FOR FOR DETECTING PEDESTRIANS
AT THE INTERSECTIONS THEN WHO
ARE COMING TO THE FINAL SLIDE
OF THIS PRESENTATION FOR FUTURE
WORK
.
WE ARE EXPLORING ALL THE
POSSIBLE OPPORTUNITIES TO
EXPAND THE INSTALLATION OF APPS
ACCESSIBLE PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL
AND ALSO WE ARE EXPLORING
RESOURCES TO UPGRADE PEDESTRIAN
SIGNAL HEADS.
SO THEY INCLUDE THE COUNTDOWN
FUNCTION OVER THE PAST SEVERAL
YEARS OUR DEPLOYMENT FOR OUR
BEES HAVE ALWAYS BEEN THERE
HAVE ALWAYS BEEN A COUPLE
OF INTERSECTIONS OR MILPARK
LOCATIONS EVERY YEAR AND WE'LL
CONTINUE ON THAT TO EXPAND RFP
INSTALLATIONS.
BICYCLE SIGNALS IS ALSO ON OUR
RADAR AS WE DO HAVE PROJECTS TO
EXPAND OUR BICYCLE NETWORK
BICYCLE SIGNALS ARE A TREATMENT
WHERE I CAN CONSIDERING
FLASHING YELLOW ARROWS AND THE
THE TREATMENT OF OF OMITTING
THE PERMISSIVE PORTION USING
FLASHING YELLOW SIGNALING
EQUIPMENT.
THAT'S ANOTHER ITEM ON OUR LIST
AND LAST IT'S FOR NEAR MISS
ANALYTICS.
SO THIS IS A TASK THAT'S UNDER
THE SAFE STREET FOR ALL AWARD
AND THE PROJECT.
WELL, RIGHT NOW WE'RE RELYING
ON REPORTED CRASH DATA AND STOP
OBSERVATION.
THE NEAR MISS ANALYTICS WILL
ALLOW US TO TAP INTO THE NEAR
MISS EVENTS AND HOPEFULLY
THAT'S GOING TO GIVE US MORE
CLUE AS TO HOW WE CAN OPERATE A
SYSTEM BETTER.
SO THAT CONCLUDES THE
PRESENTATION AND I CAN TAKE
QUESTIONS AND HOPEFULLY ADDRESS
SOME OF THOSE.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
FIRST UP IS JULIE.
>> HI.
THANKS FOR THAT PRESENTATION.
IT'S REALLY INTERESTING.
CAN YOU TELL ME MORE ABOUT HOW
THE NEAR MISS ANALYTICS WORK?
>> HOW WILL YOU FIND OUT ABOUT
NEAR MISSES WHICH ARE WE ARE
USING WHILE WE PLAN TO USE
EXISTING EQUIPMENT THE EXISTING
OLVIDO BASE, THE DETECTION
SYSTEM SO THE TECHNOLOGY WILL
LOOK AT THE THE DETECTION FROM
THE CAMERAS AND TAKE A LOOK AT
THE CONFLICTING POINTS AND HOW
THE USERS HOW CLOSE THEY COME
TO EACH OTHER RIGHT NOW THE
TECHNOLOGY IS STILL RELATIVELY
NEW.
SO IT'S IT'S AN EXPERIMENT AND
WE NEED TO FIRST TAKE A LOOK AT
HOW THE DATA WILL SHOW UP AND
THEN REALLY DRAW SOME THRESHOLD
AND SEE HOW MANY REPORTS WE'RE
GETTING FOR DIFFERENT PARTS
OF OF CONFLICTS.
IT'S THE RANGE OF CONFIDENCE
CAN BE REALLY WIDE.
IT CAN COVER CONFLICTS BETWEEN
MOTOR VEHICLES.
MOTOR VEHICLES AND NUMBER
IT CAN COVER CONFLICTS BETWEEN
OF USERS.
MOTOR VEHICLES AND NUMBER
WE RIGHT NOW NOT MANY AGENCIES
OF USERS.
HAVE EXPERIENCE WITH THAT.
WE RIGHT NOW NOT MANY AGENCIES
SO THIS IS GOING TO BE A FAIRLY
HAVE EXPERIENCE WITH THAT.
EARLY DEPLOYMENT FOR THIS TYPE
SO THIS IS GOING TO BE A FAIRLY
OF TECHNOLOGY.
EARLY DEPLOYMENT FOR THIS TYPE
>> SO ARE YOU SAYING THIS
OF TECHNOLOGY.
HAPPENS AT SPECIFIC
>> SO ARE YOU SAYING THIS
INTERSECTIONS THAT HAVE THE
HAPPENS AT SPECIFIC
EQUIPMENT INSTALLED?
INTERSECTIONS THAT HAVE THE
>> YES.
EQUIPMENT INSTALLED?
SO AS WE ARE ONLY RELYING ON
>> YES.
EXISTING CAMERAS THAT MEANS
SO AS WE ARE ONLY RELYING ON
IT'S GOING TO BE ONE OF THE
EXISTING CAMERAS THAT MEANS
FORTY EIGHT INTERSECTIONS THAT
IT'S GOING TO BE ONE OF THE
WE HAVE AT THIS POINT.
FORTY EIGHT INTERSECTIONS THAT
SO THE STUDY PERIOD IS GOING TO
WE HAVE AT THIS POINT.
BE TWO TO THREE YEARS.
SO THE STUDY PERIOD IS GOING TO
SO OUR CAMERA FOOTPRINT WILL
BE TWO TO THREE YEARS.
ALSO EXPAND IN THIS TIME.
SO OUR CAMERA FOOTPRINT WILL
SO THAT MEANS WE DO HAVE THE
ALSO EXPAND IN THIS TIME.
OPPORTUNITY TO COVER MORE
SO THAT MEANS WE DO HAVE THE
LOCATIONS THAN THE EXISTING
OPPORTUNITY TO COVER MORE
FORTY EIGHT.
LOCATIONS THAN THE EXISTING
THANK YOU.
FORTY EIGHT.
THANK YOU ERIKA THANK YOU AND
THANK YOU.
THANKS FOR THAT THOROUGH
THANK YOU ERIKA THANK YOU AND
PRESENTATION.
THANKS FOR THAT THOROUGH
THAT'S VERY INTERESTING.
PRESENTATION.
A COUPLE OF QUESTIONS.
THAT'S VERY INTERESTING.
I WAS HOPING YOU COULD GO BACK
A COUPLE OF QUESTIONS.
INTO THIS MAYBE COVERED IN THE
I WAS HOPING YOU COULD GO BACK
FUTURE WORK IN TERMS OF THE
INTO THIS MAYBE COVERED IN THE
ELIMINATING THE CONFLICT DURING
FUTURE WORK IN TERMS OF THE
PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL BUT I WAS
ELIMINATING THE CONFLICT DURING
TRYING TO REMEMBER BACK TO THE
PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL BUT I WAS
PEDESTRIAN CRASH SLIDES THAT
TRYING TO REMEMBER BACK TO THE
YOU HAD UP AT THE VERY
PEDESTRIAN CRASH SLIDES THAT
BEGINNING OF THE FOR THE
YOU HAD UP AT THE VERY
FLICKER.
BEGINNING OF THE FOR THE
OH NO THAT'S FINE.
FLICKER.
YEAH, AND SO IF I'M
OH NO THAT'S FINE.
UNDERSTANDING THAT CORRECTLY IF
YEAH, AND SO IF I'M
I'M INFERRING THINGS, IT'S WHEN
UNDERSTANDING THAT CORRECTLY IF
YOU HAVE THAT PROTECTED SIGNAL
I'M INFERRING THINGS, IT'S WHEN
IT APPEARS THAT WE'RE HAVING
YOU HAVE THAT PROTECTED SIGNAL
MUCH FEWER PEDESTRIAN CRASHES
IT APPEARS THAT WE'RE HAVING
AT THE TAIPEI LEVEL AND THAT
MUCH FEWER PEDESTRIAN CRASHES
THAT IS PROVIDING A SIGNIFICANT
AT THE TAIPEI LEVEL AND THAT
BENEFIT FOR PEDESTRIANS IS THAT
THAT IS PROVIDING A SIGNIFICANT
IS THE FUTURE WORK AROUND
BENEFIT FOR PEDESTRIANS IS THAT
TRANSITIONING MORE TO THAT
IS THE FUTURE WORK AROUND
PROTECTED SIGNAL.
TRANSITIONING MORE TO THAT
>> CAN YOU HELP ME UNDERSTAND
PROTECTED SIGNAL.
THAT BETTER?
>> CAN YOU HELP ME UNDERSTAND
THIS IS A I GUESS FROM THE
THAT BETTER?
CRASH PERSPECTIVE.
THIS IS A I GUESS FROM THE
WE WANT TO TAKE A LOOK AT HOW
CRASH PERSPECTIVE.
THE QUARRY CRASH IS IS SHOWING
WE WANT TO TAKE A LOOK AT HOW
UP.
THE QUARRY CRASH IS IS SHOWING
SO THIS IS PRIMARILY SHOWING
UP.
FOR PERMISSIVE ONLY TREATMENT.
SO THIS IS PRIMARILY SHOWING
SO WAS THE THE HISTORY CRASH
FOR PERMISSIVE ONLY TREATMENT.
THE MAJORITY OF THEM HAPPEN
SO WAS THE THE HISTORY CRASH
WHEN IT'S A PERMISSIVE MOVEMENT
THE MAJORITY OF THEM HAPPEN
WHETHER THAT PERMISSIVE
WHEN IT'S A PERMISSIVE MOVEMENT
MOVEMENT IS WITHOUT A LEFT TURN
WHETHER THAT PERMISSIVE
SIGNAL OR IT'S WORTH SO IN THIS
MOVEMENT IS WITHOUT A LEFT TURN
CASE IS SHOWING THAT FOR THE
SIGNAL OR IT'S WORTH SO IN THIS
MAJORITY OF THESE THEY ARE AND
CASE IS SHOWING THAT FOR THE
THEIR PERMISSIVE ONLY MEANING
MAJORITY OF THESE THEY ARE AND
THERE ARE SIMPLY NOT A LEFT
THEIR PERMISSIVE ONLY MEANING
TURN SIGNAL TREATMENT.
THERE ARE SIMPLY NOT A LEFT
SO WE DO HAVE DESIRE AND
TURN SIGNAL TREATMENT.
OF COURSE WE'LL HAVE TO LOOK AT
SO WE DO HAVE DESIRE AND
INTERSECTIONS AS AS AS THEY FIT
OF COURSE WE'LL HAVE TO LOOK AT
TO TO EXPLORE WAYS TO INSTALL
INTERSECTIONS AS AS AS THEY FIT
FLASHING YELLOW ARROW MEANING
TO TO EXPLORE WAYS TO INSTALL
THAT THAT TYPE OF EQUIPMENT
FLASHING YELLOW ARROW MEANING
WILL PROVIDE THE CAPABILITY TO
THAT THAT TYPE OF EQUIPMENT
TO PROVIDE EITHER PERMISSIVE
WILL PROVIDE THE CAPABILITY TO
AND THE PROTECTED OR IT'S THE
TO PROVIDE EITHER PERMISSIVE
SAME TYPE OF OPERATIONS.
AND THE PROTECTED OR IT'S THE
BUT WAS THE CAPABILITY TO OMIT
SAME TYPE OF OPERATIONS.
THE PERMISSIVE PORTION WHEN
BUT WAS THE CAPABILITY TO OMIT
PEDESTRIAN USERS ARE PRESENT IS
THE PERMISSIVE PORTION WHEN
ARE THESE CRASHES FURTHER
PEDESTRIAN USERS ARE PRESENT IS
ANALYZED?
ARE THESE CRASHES FURTHER
SO WE KNOW WHETHER THEIR LEFT
ANALYZED?
HAND TURN CRASHES OR RIGHT HAND
SO WE KNOW WHETHER THEIR LEFT
TURN ON THE THE FATAL ONE IS A
HAND TURN CRASHES OR RIGHT HAND
LEFT HAND TURN I THINK OF THE
TURN ON THE THE FATAL ONE IS A
MAJORITY OF THESE ARE LEFT HAND
LEFT HAND TURN I THINK OF THE
TURN CRASHES.
MAJORITY OF THESE ARE LEFT HAND
>> I ASSUME BECAUSE THEY'RE A
TURN CRASHES.
BUT I JUST WANTED TO RIGHT AND
>> I ASSUME BECAUSE THEY'RE A
I THINK THAT THE QUESTION I
BUT I JUST WANTED TO RIGHT AND
WOULD HAVE AS WE TRANSITION AND
I THINK THAT THE QUESTION I
IS IS THAT ARE ARE WE GETTING A
WOULD HAVE AS WE TRANSITION AND
LOT MORE BENEFIT FROM THE THE
IS IS THAT ARE ARE WE GETTING A
FULLY PROTECTED VERSUS SORT
LOT MORE BENEFIT FROM THE THE
OF THE FLASHING YELLOW AND HOW
FULLY PROTECTED VERSUS SORT
WE GATHER MORE DATA AROUND THAT
OF THE FLASHING YELLOW AND HOW
AND THEN THE SECOND QUESTION I
WE GATHER MORE DATA AROUND THAT
HAVE IS JUST REGARDING THE
AND THEN THE SECOND QUESTION I
LEADING PEDESTRIAN INTERVAL YOU
HAVE IS JUST REGARDING THE
MENTIONED THAT SOME OF THE
LEADING PEDESTRIAN INTERVAL YOU
INTERSECTIONS HAVE THAT AND
MENTIONED THAT SOME OF THE
WE'VE APPLIED TO AND GOTTEN
INTERSECTIONS HAVE THAT AND
AUTHORIZATION HAVE HAS NOT
WE'VE APPLIED TO AND GOTTEN
TURNED DOWN ANY REQUESTS THAT
AUTHORIZATION HAVE HAS NOT
WE'VE PUT IN AROUND LEADING
TURNED DOWN ANY REQUESTS THAT
PEDESTRIAN INTERVALS OR HOW DO
WE'VE PUT IN AROUND LEADING
WE DETERMINE WHEN TO MAKE THAT
PEDESTRIAN INTERVALS OR HOW DO
REQUEST FROM THE END UP
WE DETERMINE WHEN TO MAKE THAT
FEEDBACK?
REQUEST FROM THE END UP
THE MOST OF THAT THAT WE HAVE
FEEDBACK?
HEARD IS THAT FOR LOCATION THIS
THE MOST OF THAT THAT WE HAVE
IS WHERE LPI AND APPS COME
HEARD IS THAT FOR LOCATION THIS
TOGETHER MEANING THAT IN THE IN
IS WHERE LPI AND APPS COME
THE RESPONSE FROM THAT THAT IF
TOGETHER MEANING THAT IN THE IN
AN INTERSECTION IS EQUIPPED WAS
THE RESPONSE FROM THAT THAT IF
PUSHBUTTONS OR BETTER APPS THEN
AN INTERSECTION IS EQUIPPED WAS
THEN THERE ARE MORE LIKELY TO
PUSHBUTTONS OR BETTER APPS THEN
APPROVE THE INSTALLATION OF LPI
THEN THERE ARE MORE LIKELY TO
OR AND YEAH.
APPROVE THE INSTALLATION OF LPI
>> AND THE LOGIC BEHIND THAT
OR AND YEAH.
THAT IS THAT IF THERE IS NO
>> AND THE LOGIC BEHIND THAT
PUSH BUTTON THAT MEANS THE LP
THAT IS THAT IF THERE IS NO
IS PRESENT IN EVERY SIGNAL
PUSH BUTTON THAT MEANS THE LP
CYCLE WAS A PUSH BUTTON.
IS PRESENT IN EVERY SIGNAL
>> THE API IS ONLY PRESENT WHEN
CYCLE WAS A PUSH BUTTON.
THERE ARE USERS THERE.
>> THE API IS ONLY PRESENT WHEN
OK I GUESS ARE WE BEING
THERE ARE USERS THERE.
SELECTIVE IN TERMS OF WHEN
OK I GUESS ARE WE BEING
WE'RE PUTTING IN THOSE REQUESTS
SELECTIVE IN TERMS OF WHEN
TO THAT OR IS THAT A VERY LABOR
WE'RE PUTTING IN THOSE REQUESTS
INTENSIVE REQUEST TO BE GOING
TO THAT OR IS THAT A VERY LABOR
THROUGH?
INTENSIVE REQUEST TO BE GOING
>> WELL IT'S IT'S REALLY A
THROUGH?
CHANGING PATTERN FROM SEVERAL
>> WELL IT'S IT'S REALLY A
YEARS AGO AT THE VERY BEGINNING
CHANGING PATTERN FROM SEVERAL
IT'S A ONE OFF REQUEST WHEN WE
YEARS AGO AT THE VERY BEGINNING
HEAR FROM THE PUBLIC RIGHT NOW
IT'S A ONE OFF REQUEST WHEN WE
IF THERE IS A PROJECT WE JUST
HEAR FROM THE PUBLIC RIGHT NOW
AUTOMATICALLY REQUESTED OR FOR
IF THERE IS A PROJECT WE JUST
THAT WHOLE PROJECT ACTUALLY
AUTOMATICALLY REQUESTED OR FOR
IT'S IT'S BECOMING A MORE
THAT WHOLE PROJECT ACTUALLY
FREQUENT CONVERSATION NOW AND
IT'S IT'S BECOMING A MORE
THAT IS AWARE THAT WE HAVE
FREQUENT CONVERSATION NOW AND
BLANKET DESIRE TO STYOPA AT ALL
THAT IS AWARE THAT WE HAVE
THE INTERSECTIONS YOU PETER HI
BLANKET DESIRE TO STYOPA AT ALL
.
THE INTERSECTIONS YOU PETER HI
THANKS FOR THIS PRESENTATIONS.
.
A LOT OF GOOD INFORMATION AND
THANKS FOR THIS PRESENTATIONS.
SO LOOKING AT THIS SLIDE WE SEE
A LOT OF GOOD INFORMATION AND
PERMISSIVE ONLY INTERSECTIONS
SO LOOKING AT THIS SLIDE WE SEE
HAVE 14 80 LEVEL CRASHES AND
PERMISSIVE ONLY INTERSECTIONS
PERMISSIVE PLUS FLASHING YELLOW
HAVE 14 80 LEVEL CRASHES AND
ARROW HAVE TO BUT WITHOUT
PERMISSIVE PLUS FLASHING YELLOW
KNOWING HOW MANY OF EACH KIND
ARROW HAVE TO BUT WITHOUT
OF INTERSECTION THERE IS AND
KNOWING HOW MANY OF EACH KIND
THE TRAFFIC VOLUME IN THEM,
OF INTERSECTION THERE IS AND
IT'S WE CAN'T NORMALIZE.
THE TRAFFIC VOLUME IN THEM,
THAT COULD MEAN THAT WE DON'T
IT'S WE CAN'T NORMALIZE.
HAVE MANY FLASHING YELLOW ARROW
THAT COULD MEAN THAT WE DON'T
INTERSECTIONS OR IT COULD MEAN
HAVE MANY FLASHING YELLOW ARROW
THAT WE THAT WE DON'T HAVE A
INTERSECTIONS OR IT COULD MEAN
LOT OF CRASHES IN THEM.
THAT WE THAT WE DON'T HAVE A
ARE YOU FOLLOWING ME THERE?
LOT OF CRASHES IN THEM.
SO I DON'T I DON'T KNOW HOW
ARE YOU FOLLOWING ME THERE?
MUCH WE CAN DRAW FROM THE FACT
SO I DON'T I DON'T KNOW HOW
THAT THERE'S ONLY TWO CRASHES
MUCH WE CAN DRAW FROM THE FACT
IN THE FLASHING YELLOW ARROW
THAT THERE'S ONLY TWO CRASHES
INTERSECTIONS ELABORATE A
IN THE FLASHING YELLOW ARROW
LITTLE BIT MORE AS TO THE POINT
.
SURE.
IF THERE WAS ONLY ONE FLASHING
YELLOW INTERSECTION FLASHING
LIGHTS OR INTERSECTION IN THE
WHOLE CITY, WE PROBABLY
WOULDN'T HAVE MANY CRASHES
THERE.
SO WITHOUT KNOWING THE
COMPARISON OF THE TRAFFIC
VOLUME THAT GOES THROUGH
FLASHING YELLOW ARROW
INTERSECTIONS AND PERMISSIVE
ONLY INTERSECTIONS, IT'S IT'S
TOUGH TO SAY THAT TWO IS BETTER
THAN FOURTEEN IF THERE'S ONLY
ONE INTERSECTION THAT HAS A
FLASHING YELLOW ARROW AND IT
HAS TO AND IT HAD TO CRASHES
BUT THERE'S ONE HUNDRED
PERMISSIVE ONLY INTERSECTIONS
AND IT COULD BE THE TWO IS
WORSE THAN FOURTEEN BECAUSE WE
HAD TWO AT ONE INTERSECTION
INSTEAD OF FOURTEEN CRASHES
OVER ONE HUNDRED INTERSECTIONS.
>> SO I SEE THE POINT NOW.
YES CONTINUE PLEASE.
SO THAT'S ONE THING THAT
CONCERNS ME.
I MEAN WHEN WE'RE LOOKING AT
THIS DATA THE OTHER THING IS
THAT THESE FLASHING YELLOW
ARROWS APPEAR TO BE TO ME BY MY
EXPERIENCE RELATIVELY NEW LIKE
I THINK THAT THE ONE I'M MOST
FAMILIAR WITH ON SIWA CHURCH
ONLY GOT INSTALLED IN LIKE
TWENTY EIGHTEEN OR TWENTY
NINETEEN AND SO WE'RE BEGINNING
TO SEE CRASHES AND GET REPORTS
FROM OF NEAR MISSES FROM PEOPLE
FROM THESE FLASHING YELLOW
ARROW INTERSECTIONS AS THEY GET
ROLLED OUT ONE THAT COMES TO
MIND IS THE INTERSECTION
OF DEPOT AND NORTH MAIN.
THERE WAS A NEAR MISS THERE
THAT WAS REPORTED BY JONATHAN
LEVINE IN A QUICK FIX AND THE
THE FLASHING YELLOW ARROW NOW
GETS CANCELED WHEN THERE'S
PEDESTRIAN INTERACTION,
PEDESTRIAN PUSHES A BUTTON AT
THAT INTERSECTION AND SO THAT'S
GOOD.
THE PROBLEM IS THAT AT THAT
SAME INTERSECTION A CYCLIST WAS
HIT BY A CAR MAKING A LEFT TURN
AND A FLASHING YELLOW ARROW.
THERE'S NO WAY FOR A CYCLIST IN
THE BIKE LANE TO CANCEL THAT
THAT FLASHING YELLOW AREA.
>> SO I I WANT VERY MUCH
WHEREVER POSSIBLE LIKE CYO
CHURCH AND 7TH FOR EXAMPLE.
WE HAVE THE BUTTONS THERE.
I WANT THE FLASHING YELLOW
ARROW CANCELED WHEN PEOPLE PUSH
THE BUTTONS LIKE AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE.
I THINK THAT NEEDS TO BE OUR
DEFAULT EVERYWHERE WHERE WE
WHERE WE DON'T HAVE IT WE NEED
TO GET IT ASAP.
I THINK WE NEED TO THINK WE
NEED TO THINK VERY CAREFULLY
ABOUT INSTALLING ANY MORE
FLASHING YELLOW ARROWS IF WE DO
INSTALL A FLASHING YELLOW ARROW
IT HAS TO CANCEL IT HAS TO
CANCEL WHEN WE PUSH THE BUTTON
RIGHT OUT OF THE GATE.
>> BUT I THINK THAT WE NEED TO
BE HAVING A MORE OF A
CONVERSATION ABOUT WHETHER WE
WANT TO USE THESE AT ALL AND
THAT GOING BACK TO THE EXAMPLE
OF OF NORTHMAN DEPOT, WE FIXED
IT FOR THE PEDESTRIAN CONDITION
BUT WE DIDN'T FIX IT FOR THE
CYCLIST THAT WE REALLY LET DOWN
THE PERSON WHO IS IN A CRASH
AND SERIOUSLY INJURED.
SO I I DON'T WHAT I DON'T KNOW
WHAT THE STEPS ARE TO MAKE THAT
HAPPEN BUT IT'S TO ME IT FEELS
LIKE AT A PLACE LIKE OHIO
CHURCH THIS IS A SOFTWARE
CHANGE OR A SEA CHANGE TO THE
TO THE SIGNAL LIKE WHEN I PUSH
THE BUTTON IT NEEDS TO CANCEL
IT AND WE GET A WORKPLAN FOR
HOW LONG IT'S GOING TO BE
BEFORE WE IDENTIFY ALL OF THE
INTERSECTIONS THAT ARE CAPABLE
OF DOING IT.
AND WE HAVE A COMPLETE THAT
NEEDS TO BE A VERY HIGH
PRIORITY I THINK.
>> YEAH.
THANK YOU FOR THE FEEDBACK
QUESTION.
SO IN TERMS OF THE VOLUME AND
FOOTPRINT, THE HEAVIEST VOLUME
IN IN THE CITY WELL IN TERMS
OF MOTOR VEHICLES THOSE ARE THE
MAJOR TRUNK LINES.
THEY ARE A LITTLE BIT DIFFERENT
SOMETIMES AS TO NOT MOTORIZED
USERS.
SO NAMELY THE MOST HEAVILY
TRAVELED THE WASHTENAW HERE
JACKSON THAT'S THE EAST WEST
DIRECTION, THE NORTH SOUTH THAT
NORTH MAIN STREET.
WE DO HAVE SOME OTHER LIKE
UNOBVIOUS SALEEN THAT'S A MAJOR
COMMUTING CORRIDOR THAT'S UNDER
THE CITY OF JURISDICTION.
SO IN TERMS OF THE NUMBER
OF FLASHING YELLOW ARROWS, THEY
ARE JUST THERE WERE ROLLED OUT
OVER THE LAST FEW YEARS.
ELSWORTH HAS SEVERAL HOURS.
EISENHOWER HAS MAYBE WHO NOW
EISENHOWER AND PACKARD THAN
PLYMOUTH ROAD DOES NOT REALLY
HAVE MANY YET.
SO JACKSON HAS SOME.
>> SO WE DO HAVE A FEW NUMBER
OF INTERSECTIONS THAT THAT HAS
THE FLASHING YELLOW ARROW BUT
IT'S WORTH NOTING ANOTHER POINT
IS THAT THE SIGNAL EQUIPMENT
THAT'S FLASHING YELLOW ARROW
ESBATI IS RELATIVELY NEW BUT
THE TYPE OF OPERATIONS USING
PERMIT'S AND PROTECTING THAT'S
NOT NEW.
SO THE THE TYPE OF SIGNAL
EQUIPMENT PREDATES THE FLASHING
ARROW ARROW IS THE FLASHING RED
BALL.
SO IN THAT ONE WAS INSTALLED IS
KIND OF UNIQUE IN THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN AND WE DID HAVE
THAT FOR FOR WELL FOR A LONG
TIME I CANNOT REALLY NAME OR
NUMBER HOW MANY BUT BEFORE THAT
YES WE WE DID HAVE THE ANOTHER
TYPE OF SIGNAL PROVIDING THE
SAME TYPE OF OPERATIONS.
SO AN AND MOST OF THOSE
FLASHING RED HAVE BEEN REPLACED
WITH FLASHING YELLOW AND THERE
ARE STILL ONE LAST LOCATION
THAT'S NEAR WASHTENAW AND
POLLNER THAT'S STILL THERE AND
SO THAT'S ON OUR LIST.
WE WE REQUESTED THAT TO KEEP
THAT ON THE RADAR.
SO THE NEXT TIME THEY'RE THE
HOW RESOURCE ARE ARE DOING A
PROJECT THE LAST LOCATION CAN
COME OUT THEN I GUESS SEE AS TO
THE THE THE FEATURE ABOUT
OMITTING THE PERMISSIVE PORTION
THAT'S THAT'S PART OF THE THE
PRESENTATION WE TALK ABOUT
WHETHER SOME INTERCESSIONS DO
HAVE THEM SOME OTHERS DO NOT WE
TO START USING THAT FEATURE
QUITE A LOT AND THE LAST OF THE
LAST TWO INTERSECTIONS MAIN
STADIUM AND PACKARD AND FLAT
WHEN THOSE FLASHING YELLOW
ARROWS WENT IN WITH GEITA
AUTOMATICALLY WITHIN THE OLMEDA
FEATURE TO OMIT THE PERMISSIVE
PORTION SOME OTHER
INTERSECTIONS WHERE WE HAVE NOT
DONE THAT.
IT'S IT'S REALLY A BALANCING
OF HOW HOW WE CAN BETTER
SERVICE THE NON MOTORIZED USERS
.
>> SO LIKE FOR THE INTERSECTION
OF OF EISENHAUER AND STONE
SCHOOL IT IS IT IS IT IS ONE
OF THE THE NUMBERS SHOWN IN THE
SLIDE HERE.
BUT RIGHT NOW WE DO HAVE
AUTOMATIC RECALL TO TO THE
PEDESTRIAN CROSSWALKS IF WE
TURN ON THE OLMEDA FEATURE
THAT'S THAT'S THAT'S SIMPLY
MEANS THAT THE FLASHING YELLOW
ARROW WILL NEVER SHOW UP SO DO
WE DO WE WISH TO KEEP THE
AUTOMATIC RECALL OR DO WE WANT
TO TAKE THAT AWAY AND PUT IT IN
THE THE HELMET FEATURE FOR THE
POMACE PORTION SO SO THAT'S
THAT'S THE THE KIND
OF DISCUSSION WE'RE HAVING
RIGHT NOW.
>> JUST THE REITERATIVE OUTSIDE
OF CHURCH.
I THINK THAT COULD HAPPEN
TOMORROW.
IT HAS THE BUTTONS YOU DON'T
GET LOCK SIGNAL WITHOUT THE
BUTTONS YOU COULD CANCEL THE
YOU CAN PERMIT THE FLASHING
YELLOW ARROW TOMORROW IF YOU
CHANGE THE SOFTWARE AND I WRITE
AND WE NEED TO GO GO GO ON THIS
LIKE WE NEED TO DO THIS RIGHT
NOW.
>> YEAH, IT'S DEFINITELY A
SOFTWARE CHANGE AND FOR
INTERSECTIONS WHERE WE DO NOT
HAVE THE RECALL.
YES.
THERE SHOULD BE TURNED OUT OK.
>> I'D LIKE TO KNOW HOW MANY
ARE LIKE THAT.
HOW MANY ARE I HAVE A CHURCH
AND LIKE WHEN DO WE EXPECT TO
HAVE THEM ALL DONE THIS?
IT FEELS TO ME LIKE WE COULD DO
MORE THIS SUMMER SO LET'S BIKE
IS THAT SOMETHING WE CAN FOLLOW
UP ON IN A LATER MEETING RATS
AND RAYMOND?
>> I THINK SO, YES.
HAVE A MONTHLY UPDATE NOW THAT
WOULD BE AN EXCELLENT THING
THAT I WOULD THAT WOULD BE
GREAT.
THANK YOU AND THANKS AGAIN FOR
THE PRESENTATION.
THIS IS SUPER INFORMATIVE
REALLY.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
ANYONE ELSE ALL RIGHT YET
AGAIN?
>> THANKS, LOU.
I REALLY APPRECIATE THE THE THE
DEPTH AND ALL THE DISCUSSION
SUPPORT.
SO THANKS FOR COMING IN AND AND
TALKING ABOUT THIS WITH US NOW.
>> THANK YOU FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY AS A LITTLE AND
WE'LL FOLLOW UP.
>> YEAH I THINK IT'S A GOOD
IDEA TO FOLLOW UP ON THOSE
CASES.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT UP IS TRAFFIC CALMING AND
SPEED MANAGEMENT.
SO CHANGES TO THE TRAVEL
COMMUTE PROGRAM WERE PASSED BY
CITY COUNCIL UPON
RECOMMENDATION OF THIS
COMMISSION.
AND SO RIGHT NOW RAYMOND WILL
GIVE AN OVERVIEW OF WHAT STAFF
HAS BEEN WORKING ON SINCE THE
PASSAGE OF THAT RESOLUTION LAST
YEAR.
RAYMOND
.
ALL RIGHT.
YOU GETTING TO SWITCH AROUND
DIFFERENT DOCUMENTS THE THERE
WE GO.
>> THIS IS SHOWING THE TRAFFIC
COMING RESOLUTION
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY.
I THUMBS UP.
>> OK, THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
SO
AGAIN, JUST AS A REMINDER
THERE WAS A RESOLUTION PASSED
BY CITY COUNCIL AT THE
RECOMMENDATION OF THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION TO
KIND OF RETHINK THE TRAFFIC
PROGRAM.
SO THERE WERE SEVERAL RESOLVE
CLAUSES WHICH YOU'LL SEE IN
THIS DOCUMENT.
STAFF HAD A SERIES OF SEVERAL
MEETINGS SINCE THE PASSAGE
OF THAT RESOLUTION AND THEN WE
RECONVENED THE TRAFFIC
SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION LAST
MONTH AND KIND OF TALK THROUGH
SOME OF THESE INITIAL THOUGHTS
.
SO SO ONE OF THE THINGS I'LL
NOTE IS THIS DOCUMENT IS
STAMPED DRAFT BECAUSE WE ARE
STILL KIND OF THINKING THROUGH
IT.
WE'RE CONTINUING TO REFINE THE
IDEAS ESPECIALLY BASED ON SOME
OF THE FEEDBACK THAT WE GOT
FROM THE SUBCOMMITTEE.
SO I'LL JUST QUICKLY RUN
THROUGH THESE.
I'LL PROBABLY JUST I PROBABLY
WON'T READ EVERY WORD ON THERE
BUT I WANT TO HIGHLIGHT THE
KIND OF BIGGEST THINGS THAT
MIGHT DRAW YOUR ATTENTION OR
THAT YOU MIGHT FIND OF INTEREST
IF I GLOSS OVER SOMETHING THAT
PIQUED YOUR INTEREST BY ALL
MEANS PLEASE CALL THAT OUT AND
I CAN CIRCLE BACK ON THAT.
SO THE FIRST RESOLVE CLAUSE
REALLY TALKS ABOUT SHIFTING THE
PROGRAM AWAY FROM A SORT
OF CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL FOR
INDIVIDUAL PROJECTS AND THAT
THESE ARE GOING TO BE STAFF
ADMINISTERED.
>> SO THIS FIRST LIST OF BULLET
POINTS REALLY KIND OF UNPACKS
THAT A LOT OF SUGGESTED CHANGES
WE'RE THINKING TO THE PROGRAM
THAT GOES BEYOND JUST SORT OF A
STAFF ADMINISTERED PROGRAM.
>> SO THE FIRST IS WE THINK
THAT MAY BE SETTING A MINIMUM
PROJECT AREA SIZE WOULD MAKE
SENSE.
THAT SEEMS TO BE A WAY THAT
ALLOWS US AFFORDS US THE
OPPORTUNITY TO PUT MULTIPLE
DEVICES.
WE TEND TO SPACE ESPECIALLY
VERTICAL DEVICES SUCH AS SPEED
HUMPS BETWEEN TWO AND THREE
HUNDRED FEET APART AT A
MINIMUM.
SO IF WE ESTABLISH A MINIMUM
TRAJECTORY OF FIVE HUNDRED FEET
THAT'LL GIVE OPTIONS RIGHT.
WE CAN LOOK AT VERTICAL
DEVICES, HORIZONTAL DEVICES SO
THINGS YOU DRIVE OVER, THINGS
YOU DRIVE AROUND.
THAT'S ONE OF THE KIND
OF THINGS WE'RE LOOKING AT.
THIS ISN'T A BIG DEPARTURE FROM
WHAT'S CURRENTLY IN THERE BUT
HELPS REALLY SOLIDIFY WHAT WE
THINK COULD BE AN EFFECTIVE WAY
TO RECEIVE SOME OF THESE
REQUESTS.
THE NEXT POINT I WANT TO RAISE
IS PROBABLY ONE OF THE BIGGEST
ONES THAT YOU MIGHT BE
INTERESTED.
>> ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE'RE
SUGGESTING IS RAISING THE
THRESHOLD FOR THE PERCENT
OF SIGNATURES REQUIRED TO
QUALIFY OR TRAFFIC COMING.
AND I'LL TOUCH ON THIS A LITTLE
BIT LATER AS WELL AS TO WHAT
OUR RATIONALE IS FOR IT.
BUT RIGHT NOW THE PETITION
PROCESS ALLOWS FOR 50 PLUS ONE
A PETITION 50 PERCENT PLUS ONE.
THE AFFECTED AREA CAN QUALIFY.
>> BUT THEN IF YOU REMEMBER WE
HAVE SORT OF A SCORING MATRIX
THAT THE HIGHER PERCENTAGE
OF SIGNATURES THAT YOU GET, THE
MORE POINTS YOU CAN GET.
SO IF YOU GET KIND OF THE BARE
MINIMUM YOU GET I FORGET HOW
MANY POINTS QUALIFYING POINTS
LIKE FIVE POINTS.
BUT IF YOU GET ONE HUNDRED
PERCENT OF SIGNATURES IN YOUR
PROJECT YOU CAN GET PRETTY MUCH
ALL THE POINTS TO QUALIFY.
WE'RE SUGGESTING TO ELIMINATE
ALL OTHER QUALIFYING CRITERIA
EXCEPT FOR THE SIGNATURES.
SO THERE'S NO LONGER SPEED
THERE'S NO LONGER VOLUME
CRITERIA, THERE'S NO LONGER
PROXIMITY TO DESTINATION.
SOME OF THOSE OTHER THINGS THAT
YOU SEE IN THE REVIEW IN THE
PAST THAT IT WOULD REALLY JUST
BE THE SIGNATURES THAT WE
RECEIVE AND PART OF THE REASON
FOR THIS IS I'LL TALK ABOUT IN
JUST A MINUTE IS NOW THAT THE
PROGRAM DICTATES THAT IF YOU
QUALIFY FOR TRAFFIC COMING YOU
ARE GETTING TRAFFIC COMING.
WE REALLY THOUGHT THAT HAVING A
HIGHER THRESHOLD OF BUYING ON
THE FRONT END AMONG THE
NEIGHBORHOOD WOULD BE GOOD THAT
EVERYBODY WHO SIGNS THE
PETITION UNDERSTANDS AND
RECOGNIZES THAT SOMETHING IS
GOING IT THAT THIS RIGHT NOW
THE WAY THE PROCESS WORKS OUT
IS THAT YOU MIGHT SIGN IT BUT
THEN YOU CAN VETO VOTE AT THE
END.
WELL, THAT VETO VOTE HAS BEEN
REMOVED FOR THE RESOLUTION SO
WE THOUGHT THAT THIS WAS A WAY
TO HELP STRIKE A BALANCE
OF ELIMINATING ALL OTHER
QUALIFYING CRITERIA BUT MAYBE
RAISING THE THRESHOLD YOU FOR
THE NUMBER OF SIGNATURES
REQUIRED.
NOW THE SUBCOMMITTEE DID RAISE
SOME THOUGHTS THAT WE WANT TO
KEEP AN EYE ON.
SO IN AREAS OF RENTAL THAT
MIGHT BE HARD TO ACHIEVE AND SO
THERE WAS SOME SUGGESTION THAT
WE CONTINUE TO MONITOR THIS
SPACE AND WHEN WE TALK TO
PETITIONERS IF THEY'RE HAVING A
HARD TIME GETTING US GOING, WE
CAN REVISIT THIS ISSUE IN THE
FUTURE.
>> I WILL SAY IF YOU AREN'T
AWARE WE DO TRY TO FACILITATE
THE GATHERING OF SIGNATURES FOR
PETITIONERS.
WE WILL HELP THEM SET UP ONLINE
SURVEYS THAT CAN COUNT TOWARDS
SIGNATURES AND EVEN HELP THEM
WITH POSTCARDS AND A WHOLE
BUNCH OF OTHER THINGS AS WELL.
>> AND THEN THE SUBCOMMITTEE
ALSO MENTIONED THAT THERE ARE
OTHER WAYS TO GET TRAFFIC
COMING LIKE YOU HEARD NICK
HUTCHINSON'S EARLIER ABOUT SOME
OF THE CAPITAL PROJECTS THAT
ARE INCORPORATING TRAFFIC
CALMING AS A MATTER OF COURSE,
WHICH AGAIN IS A RESULT OF THIS
RESOLUTION.
>> ANOTHER THING WE TALKED
ABOUT IS MAYBE TRYING TO
STREAMLINE THE PROCESS A LITTLE
BIT, PUTTING A LOT
OF INFORMATION ON THE FRONT END
AS PART OF THE QUALIFYING
PETITION SO THAT WE UNDERSTAND
WHAT SOME OF THE PAIN POINTS
ARE AMONG THE NEIGHBORHOOD AND
THEN THAT WILL HELP US REALLY
REFINE SOME OF THE INITIAL
STARTER IDEAS AND THEN YOU GO
FROM THE INITIAL QUESTIONNAIRE
INTO A PRELIMINARY SUGGESTED
PLAN AND SELF GUIDED TOUR, DO
THE WORKSHOP TO DISCUSS ALL
OF THAT, MAKE REFINEMENTS AND
THEN IMPLEMENT IT AND THEN
FOLLOW UP WITH THE RESIDENTS A
YEAR LATER TO SEE WHAT THEIR
IMPRESSIONS ARE ABOUT THOSE
DEPLOYMENT'S
.
SOME OF THESE ARE JUST KIND
OF OPERATIONALLY WE'LL NEED TO
UPDATE SOME OF THE DOCUMENTS.
WE'LL NEED TO UPDATE THE
GUIDEBOOK IN THE WEBSITE AND
SOME OF THOSE AS WELL.
WE ARE STILL TREATING WHAT I
WILL CALL GRANDFATHERED
PETITIONS PETITIONS THAT CAME
IN UNDER THE OLD PETITION
PROCESS.
WE'RE STILL FOLLOWING THAT OLD
PETITION PROCESS AND ANYTHING
THAT CAME IN AFTER SEPTEMBER.
WE'VE KIND OF INDICATED TO THEM
THAT THERE MIGHT CHANGES IN
TERMS OF HOW THEIR PETITIONS
ARE PROCESSED.
SO WE'RE TRYING TO JUST MAKE
SURE THAT THAT'S CLEAR FOR
EVERYBODY.
WE HAD A LITTLE BIT
OF DISCUSSION ABOUT FEEDBACK
SIGNS IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD AND
SO WE ARE LOOKING AT WHICH
TOOLS WE WANT TO INCORPORATE
BASED ON THE NATIONAL BEST
PRACTICES WHICH IS AGAIN A
FUNCTION OF THE RESOLUTION
GUIDING US TO NACCHO, THE
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CITY
TRANSPORTATION OFFICIALS AND
OTHER DOCUMENTS AND WHAT WE
WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE PICK
DEVICES THAT ARE EFFECTIVE IN
THE LONG TERM.
SO THIS NEXT BULLET POINT OR
THE NEXT RESULT US TALKS ABOUT
THAT WE WILL USE A
COLLABORATIVE MODEL FOR PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT AGAIN READING
BETWEEN THE LINES WHAT THIS
MEANS AS THE EXISTING PROGRAM
IS AN OUR MODEL WHICH MEANS THE
RESIDENTS HAVE A FINAL VOTE ON
THE PLAN WHEN WE MOVE TO A
COLLABORATIVE MODEL THE IDEA IS
THAT WE WORK WITH THE RESIDENTS
ON THE PLAN BUT WE WILL MOVE
FORWARD WITHOUT A FINAL VOTE
FROM THEM WHICH AGAIN AS I SAID
EARLIER, THIS IS ANOTHER
RATIONALE FOR RAISING THAT
SIGNATURE THRESHOLD TO TWO
THIRDS.
THIS ALSO IN TURN JUST
LOGISTICALLY MEANS THERE IS NO
FINAL POLLING.
THAT'S RIGHT.
NOW THAT'S A FINAL STEP ON THE
PETITION PROCESSES ONCE WE'VE
KIND OF GONE THROUGH AND
ITERATED A COUPLE OF TIMES WE
WE SEND IT OUT THAT THAT STEP
IS NOW AND THEN ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT THE SUBCOMMITTEE
BROUGHT UP IS EVEN THOUGH CITY
COUNCIL AND BY EXTENSION
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION ARE
NO LONGER PART OF THE APPROVAL
PROCESS FOR INDIVIDUAL
PETITIONS THAT WE WOULD STILL
CONTINUE TO REPORT TO YOU ON
THEM AND OUR STAFF IS FULLY
COMMITTED TO THAT THAT WE WOULD
TELL YOU WHICH PROJECTS WE'RE
CURRENTLY PROCESSING AND WHAT
THE OUTCOME OF THOSE ARE AND
WHEN THEY'RE SCHEDULED FOR
IMPLEMENTATION PROBABLY WOULD
BE DONE AS PART OF THE MONTHLY
REPORT SIMILAR TO HOW WE'RE
DOING NOW.
YOU JUST WOULDN'T HAVE ACTION
ITEMS THAT COME BEFORE YOU AS A
MATTER OF COURSE IN YOUR
PACKETS.
THE NEXT RESOLVE CLAUSE TALKS
ABOUT REALLY TRYING TO
INCORPORATE TRAFFIC CALMING
ELEMENTS AS A MATTER OF COURSE
FOR ROAD RESURFACING PROJECTS
OR ANY TIME CAPITAL PROJECTS
AND IF IT DISTURBS THE EXISTING
ROAD SURFACE.
SO AGAIN, YOU SAW NICK
HUTCHINSON'S PRESENTATION
EARLIER.
WE HAVE TAKEN THAT TO HEART.
WE DON'T HAVE ACTIVE PETITIONS
.
NO WE DON'T IN THE LIQUID
NEIGHBORHOOD BUT WE ARE GOING
AHEAD AND PUTTING IN SOME
TRAFFIC CALMING ELEMENTS.
SOME OF THOSE ARE HORIZONTAL
ELEMENTS.
THE THINGS YOU DRIVE AROUND
LIKE CURVE EXTENSIONS OR BUMP
OUTS, SOME OF THEM ARE VERTICAL
ELEMENTS, THINGS YOU DRIVE OVER
LIKE SPEED HUMPS.
>> WHAT WE HAVE INDICATED HERE
IS AND WE'VE HAD A LOT
OF INTERNAL DISCUSSION AND EVEN
WITH THE SUBCOMMITTEE ABOUT
WHAT THAT THRESHOLD SHOULD BE
FOR AUTOMATIC INCLUSION OF A
VERTICAL DEVICE OR SOMETHING
YOU DRIVE OVER AND OUR INITIAL
THOUGHTS RIGHT NOW ARE A LINE
IN THE SAND OF TWENTY EIGHT
MILES PER HOUR.
IF WE GO OUT AND WE COLLECT
DATA ON A ROADWAY AND WE SEE
THAT THE EIGHTY FIFTH
PERCENTILE IS TWENTY EIGHT
MILES PER HOUR OR OVER THEN
YOU
KNOW, VERTICAL ELEMENTS, THINGS
YOU DRIVE OVER LIKE SPEED HUMPS
THAT'S NOT TO SAY THAT AREAS
THAT DON'T HAVE POSTED SPEED
AROUND EIGHTY FIFTH PERCENTILE
SPEED OF 20 MILES PER HOUR
STILL MAY NOT GET TRAFFIC
CALMING ELEMENTS LIKE AGAIN YOU
HEARD FROM NIC WE DID NOT
OBSERVE SPEEDING PROBLEMS IN
THE LAKEWOOD NEIGHBORHOOD BUT
WE ARE STILL DOING SOME
INTERSECTION RECONFIGURATIONS
TO SLOW VEHICLES AS THEY TURN
AROUND CORNERS AND PUTTING IN
SOME BUMPS ESPECIALLY NEAR THE
SCHOOL'S
.
THE SUBCOMMITTEE DID RAISE A
QUESTION ABOUT YOU KNOW,
SOMETIMES THE PAVEMENT
CONDITION CAN ACTUALLY
EXACERBATE SPEEDS SO SOMETIMES
WE COLLECT DATA BEFOREHAND IF
THE ROAD IS RIDDLED WITH
POTHOLES THAT THAT MAY NOT BE
THE EXPERIENCE ONCE THE ROAD IS
RESURFACED, IT'S HARD FOR US TO
PREDICT WHAT THAT CHANGE WILL
BE.
WE CAN MAYBE TRY TO DO SOME
THIS SOUNDS MORE ACADEMIC THAN
I THINK WE CAN AFFORD BUT SOME
SORT OF LIKE LONGITUDINAL
EXERCISE THAT IF WE COLLECT
DATA BEFORE COLLECT DATA AFTER
MAYBE WE CAN SEE WHAT THAT
IMPACT IS OVER TIME.
>> BUT I THINK WHERE WE'RE AT
RIGHT NOW ON THE STAGE IT'S
HARD FOR US TO PREDICT THAT AND
I WILL NOTE AND EVEN WE HAD A
LOT OF INTERNAL DISCUSSION IN
THE SUBCOMMITTEE HAS RAISED
WHETHER TWENTY EIGHT MILES PER
HOUR IS THE APPROPRIATE KIND
OF THRESHOLD TO CONSIDER
VERTICAL DEVICES OR NOT.
SO IT IS SOMETHING THAT WE'RE
STILL TRYING TO THINK THROUGH A
LITTLE BIT.
YOU KNOW, ADMITTEDLY 20 MILES
PER HOUR IS SOMEWHAT ARBITRARY.
WE FELT 20 FOLKS ARE DOING THE
POSTED SPEED LIMIT OF TWENTY
FIVE MILES PER HOUR.
BY DEFINITION THERE ISN'T A
SPEEDING PROBLEM SO IT DIDN'T
SEEM APPROPRIATE TO INCORPORATE
VERTICAL ELEMENTS AGAIN THINGS
YOU DRIVE OVER 30 FELT TOO
HIGH.
SO WE KIND OF LOOKED AT SOME
MIDPOINT AND THAT'S HOW WE RANK
AT TWENTY EIGHT I WILL ADMIT
THAT THERE'S A LOT OF METHOD TO
THAT MADNESS ASIDE FROM WHAT I
JUST EXPLAINED SOME OTHER
THINGS THAT WE MENTIONED ABOUT
HOW WE MIGHT ALSO LOOK TO FOCUS
IN ON AREAS FOR POSSIBLE
TRAFFIC CALMING IS YES WE CAN
GO OUT AND COLLECT SPEED DATA
BUT THEN DO WE ALSO HAVE A
HISTORY OF WHERE THERE ARE PAST
REQUESTS OR ARE THERE THINGS
IDENTIFIED IN THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN OR ARE
THERE JUST OTHER INPUTS THAT
COULD HELP US INFORM THAT
THERE'S A DESIRE AMONG THE
NEIGHBORHOOD WHEN WE'RE IN THAT
NEIGHBORHOOD RESURFACING THAT
WE CAN CONSIDER SOME ADDITIONAL
TRAFFIC?
>> AND THEN AGAIN, YOU'VE
ALREADY HEARD THIS REPORT ABOUT
HOW WE'RE ALREADY TRYING TO PUT
THAT INTO ACTION.
THE NEXT RESOLVE PAUSE REALLY
TALKS ABOUT MAKING SURE WE'RE
USING BEST PRACTICES.
SO AGAIN, A LOT OF THAT IS KIND
OF LIKE WHAT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT ABOVE.
BUT LOOKING AT THE NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF TRANSPORTATION
OFFICIALS, THE INSTITUTE
OF TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERS AND
FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION
TO REALLY MAKE SURE THAT THE
TOOLS WE'RE USING ARE OUR KIND
OF AS UP TO IT AS POSSIBLE AND
THEN THE SECOND TO LAST RESORT
TALKS ABOUT DEVELOPING A SCHOOL
TRAFFIC CALMING TOOL KIT BY THE
END OF THIS CALENDAR YEAR WE
HAVE STARTED TO ENGAGE WITH THE
SCHOOLS.
WE'VE JUST HAD SOME PRELIMINARY
DISCUSSIONS WITH STAFF
INTERNALLY, HAD SOME STARTER
IDEAS THAT WE FLOATED WITH THEM
AND I THINK A LOT OF THE
DISCUSSION RIGHT NOW IS REALLY
ABOUT HOW DO WE DEFINE
PROXIMITY TO SCHOOL?
ARE WE GOING TO DEFINE A
PERIMETER LIKE A BUFFER AROUND
A SCHOOL OR ARE WE GOING TO LET
THE SCHOOL IDENTIFY DESIGNATED
SAFER PLACE TO SCHOOL AREAS
LIKE WALKABOUTS, BIKE ROUTES
AND THEN WE FOCUS OUR ATTENTION
THERE AND THAT'S ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT WE'RE GOING TO HAVE
TO REALLY TEASE OUT WORKING
WITH THE SCHOOLS IN TERMS
OF WHICH IS THE BEST AND IT MAY
BE A MENU TO APPROACH IN SOME
INSTANCES IT MAY BE A DEFINED
AREA.
IN OTHER INSTANCES IT MAY BE
BEYOND THAT DEFINED AREA IF
THEY HAVE A DESIGNATED WALKING
AROUND FOR EXAMPLE, WE'RE ALSO
KIND OF THINKING THROUGH OR
TRYING TO BE SENSITIVE TO THE
NEEDS AROUND AN ELEMENTARY
SCHOOL MIGHT BE DIFFERENT
AROUND THE NEEDS AROUND THE
MIDDLE SCHOOL MIGHT BE
DIFFERENT AROUND THE NEEDS FROM
HIGH SCHOOL AND WHAT DOES THAT
LOOK LIKE?
YOU KNOW AND JUST TRYING TO
THINK THROUGH WHAT THAT IS.
SO THERE'S STILL A LOT
OF QUESTIONS I THINK THAT WE
NEED TO WORK THROUGH,
ESPECIALLY WORKING WITH THE
SCHOOLS.
WE HAVE SOME TIME OBVIOUSLY TO
CONTINUE TO TALK THROUGH THIS
BUT IT IS SOMETHING WE ARE
TRYING TO START FORMULATING
IDEAS AROUND THE SUBCOMMITTEE
GAVE US A LOT OF REALLY GOOD
THOUGHTS ON THIS SUBJECT REALLY
HOW ARE WE DEFINING THOSE RULES
TO SCHOOLS?
SHOULD WE ALSO CONSIDER PRIVATE
SCHOOLS?
WHAT ABOUT DAYCARES AND
PRESCHOOLS PICK UP AND DROP
AREAS MAYBE BEYOND THE ACTUAL
ROADWAY OR DRIVEWAYS INTO
SCHOOL NEAR REMOTE DROP OFFS?
WELL, THAT'S TECHNICALLY NOT
CONSIDERED A TRAFFIC HOMING
DEVICE.
IT REALLY CAN HAVE A TRAFFIC
CALMING SORT OF EFFECT BECAUSE
YOU'RE DISPLACING SOME OF THE
TRAFFIC THAT MIGHT OTHERWISE BE
IN THE IMMEDIATE VICINITY
OF WHERE KIDS ARE WALKING AND
BIKING.
SO THAT MIGHT BE SOMETHING
AGAIN WE CAN KIND FACTOR INTO
THE SCHOOL TRAFFIC COMING
TOOLKIT THAT'S A LITTLE
DIFFERENT THAN THE OTHER
TRAFFIC CALMING TOOLKIT.
I THOUGHT THAT WAS A REALLY
GOOD RECOMMENDATION FROM THE
SUBCOMMITTEE AND THEN THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ALSO WAS CORRECT
TO POINT OUT THAT IT'S NOT
ALWAYS JUST SPEED ABOUT AROUND
SCHOOLS.
SOMETIMES IT'S BAD BEHAVIOR FOR
THOSE OF YOU WHO HAVE EVER SEEN
MORNING DROP OFF OR AFTERNOON
PICK UP ON MILLER, YOU KNOW
PEOPLE ARE PARKING THE BIKE
LANE.
THEY'RE PARKING ACROSS THE
CROSSWALK.
WE GET A LOT OF AREAS WHERE
PARENTS ARE NOT BEHAVING LIKE
ADULTS UNFORTUNATELY AND NOT
BEHAVING APPROPRIATELY.
AND SO IT'S NOT JUST ABOUT
SPEED.
IT'S ALSO ABOUT SOME BAD
BEHAVIORS OF MOTORISTS AND THEN
JUST FLAGGING SOME OTHER
OPPORTUNITIES ABOUT WHO WE CAN
WORK WITH.
AGAIN, THESE ARE
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ABOUT YOU KNOW, IS
THE SCHOOL PROPER?
IS IT ADMINISTRATOR?
IS IT THE PARENT TEACHER
ORGANIZATIONS OR IS IT THE
PRINCIPALS AND THINGS LIKE
THAT?
SO I THINK AGAIN THESE ARE
GREAT IDEAS FOR US TO CONTINUE
TO TEASE OUT WHAT THE SCHOOLS
THERE WAS ALSO SOME DISCUSSION
ABOUT TRAFFIC CALMING PETITIONS
THAT ARE AROUND NEIGHBORHOOD
INITIATED TRAFFIC CALMING
PETITIONS AROUND SCHOOLS AND
WHAT ROLE THE SCHOOL CAN PLAY
IN THAT.
AND WE KIND OF CLARIFIED SOME
OF THE ENGAGEMENT WE CURRENTLY
DO BUT MAYBE WE CAN REEVALUATE
IF THAT CAN BE DONE A LITTLE
DIFFERENTLY AND I'LL END ON THE
SCHOOL NOTE THAT YOU KNOW, IN
OUR INITIAL DISCUSSIONS WITH
PUBLIC SCHOOLS THEY ARE
RECEPTIVE TO THIS.
THEY ARE SUPPORTIVE BUT THEY
ALSO ARE FAIRLY LIMITED IN
THEIR CAPACITY.
>> SO WE'RE COMMITTED TO
WORKING WITH US ON THIS BUT WE
WILL PROBABLY TAKE SOME TIME TO
TEASE THIS OUT SO WE WILL WE'LL
CONTINUE TO WORK WITH THEM ON
IT AND THEN THE LAST RESOLVE
CLAUSE REALLY MENTIONS THAT
WE'LL CONTINUE TO VET THESE
IDEAS WITH THE SUBCOMMITTEE
WHICH AGAIN WE RECONVENE THEM
IN FEBRUARY AND WE CONTINUE TO
REFINE THIS EVEN FURTHER.
>> WE WILL CONTINUE TO ENGAGE
THEM ON THIS MATTER.
SO WITH THAT THAT'S WHAT I
WANTED TO SHOW TODAY.
AGAIN, I DO WANT TO UNDERSCORE
THIS IS STILL A WORK IN
PROGRESS.
I WANT THANK COUNCIL MEMBER
BRIGS, COUNCILMAN BRACKMAN AND
BRETT ONOMICHI FOR THEIR
CONTRIBUTION ON THE
SUBCOMMITTEE AS A REMINDER
BRETT TRANSITIONED ON WHEN
MOLLY TRANSITIONED OFF.
SO AN ABSTENTION.
I ALSO WANT TO THANK MOLLY FOR
HER PAST CONTRIBUTIONS TO THIS
EFFORT AS WELL.
AND AGAIN, WE STILL HAVE SOME
WORK TO DO BUT THERE ARE SOME
OF THE IDEAS ARE I THINK COMING
INTO FOCUS.
>> THANK YOU, CHAIRMAN.
YEP.
I LOOK FORWARD TO CONTINUING
THIS.
ALL RIGHT.
MOVING ON TO STAFF REPORT AND
UPDATES RAYMOND THAT'S YOU
AGAIN.
>> THAT IS ME AGAIN AND I CAN
BE QUICKER ON THIS ONE.
>> ALL RIGHT.
AND CHRIS IS OUT IT TAKES ME
MOM BECAUSE I'M TRYING TO PUT
TIMESTAMPS ON WHEN WE GET TO
THESE THINGS JUST SO THAT NEEDS
TO FILL IN NOTES ON ANYTHING HE
CAN DO THAT SO THAT'S WHAT I'M
DOING WHEN I'M SWITCHING
SCREENS.
SO THANK YOU FOR YOUR PATIENCE
.
OK, I THINK I'M SHOWING THE
RIGHT SCREEN THERE
TRANSPORTATION PROJECT UPDATE
SHOWING UP.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
OK, STREET RESURFACING WORK IS
SCHEDULED TO START NEXT MONTH.
THIS APPLIES TO THE LEFTOVER
PROJECTS FROM TWENTY TWENTY
THREE BUT MOVING INTO THE NEXT
ROUND OF PROJECTS FOR THE
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR PROJECTS
THOSE WILL START A MONTH LATER
IN MAY.
SIDEWALK GAPS IN THE PROJECTS
HAVEN'T CHANGED JUST SOME
OF THE TIMELINES HAVE BEEN
UPDATED SO BURWOOD IS SUMMER
FALL ELSWORTH IS THE SPRING
LENDALE CIRCLE IS SUMMER.
PAIGE IS LATE SUMMER FALL STONE
SCHOOL IS SUMMER SUN WOOD AND
GRAY LAKE IS SUMMER.
ONCE WE START GETTING
CONTRACTORS UNDER A MORE
DEFINITIVE TIMELINE YOU'LL
START TO SEE FURTHER REFINEMENT
ON WHEN THESE ARE GOING TO
HAPPEN.
>> STATE AND HILL KICKED OFF
YOU HEARD NICK ALLUDE TO THAT
EARLIER ON THAT IS EXPECTED TO
GO THROUGH AUGUST IS MEDICAL
CENTER DRIVE BRIDGE IS EXPECTED
TO KICK OFF NEXT MONTH.
MILLER AVENUE PROJECT WE KIND
OF TALKED ABOUT THAT ALREADY.
WE TALKED A LOT ABOUT IT LAST
MONTH.
BUT THERE IS ACTIVE ONGOING
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT ON THIS.
WE DID HAVE WE ROLLED OUT A LOT
OF CONCEPTS AT LAST WEEK'S
DOWNTOWN RECIRCULATION STUDY
AND COMPREHENSIVE PLAN WORKSHOP
GOT A LOT OF COMMENTS.
THERE'S ALSO AN INFORMATIONAL
YOUTUBE VIDEO.
THERE'S A SHORT FEEDBACK SURVEY
AND A MAPPING TOOL WHERE YOU
CAN GO AND DROP INS AND WE ALSO
HAVE A SERIES OF VIRTUAL OFFICE
HOURS.
THE FIRST ONE WAS LAST NIGHT
AND THE NEXT ONE IS COMING UP
NEXT WEEK MIDDAY.
SO CHECK OUT THE PROJECT
WEBSITE FOR MORE DETAILS.
AND THEN AS YOU ALREADY HEARD
NICK MENTIONED THAT THE PROJECT
IS GOING TO BE DONE IN TWO
PHASES OF PROBABLY KICKING OFF
IN JUNE BUT A LOT OF THE
MAJORITY OF THE PROJECT WILL
PROBABLY HAPPEN IN THE
FOLLOWING YEAR CALENDAR YEAR
DOWNTOWNER CIRCULATION STUDY
KIND OF BUILDING OFF THE MILLER
SINCE THEY WERE KIND OF JOINED
AT THE HIP HAD VERY GOOD
PARTICIPATION AT LAST WEEK'S
WORKSHOPS WE HAD FOUR PUBLIC
WORKSHOPS AND A WHOLE SERIES
OF STAKEHOLDER MEETINGS.
THE INITIAL ESTIMATES ARE WE
HAD OVER THREE HUNDRED PEOPLE,
TEN OF THOSE WORKSHOPS, LOTS
OF GOOD STICKY NOTES AND
FEEDBACK THAT WE GOT AND I
BELIEVE THE PROJECT WEBSITE YOU
CAN STILL GO IN AND SEE ALL
THOSE MATERIALS AND CONTINUE TO
ADD STICKY NOTES.
I DON'T KNOW HOW MUCH LONGER
THOSE WILL BE UP THOUGH.
>> STREETLIGHT OUTAGES THREE
HUNDRED AND SEVEN REPAIRS SO
FAR BY TRAFFIC CALMING
BERTARELLI HENRY WHICH YOU
APPROVED LAST MONTH.
WE'LL GO TO CITY COUNCIL IN
JUNE.
THAT'S A FUNCTION OF REALLY
UNDERSTANDING WHAT THE BUDGET
IS AND HOW MANY PROJECTS WE CAN
SUPPORT IN THE FISCAL YEAR.
>> TWENTY FIVE.
SO THAT'S WHY THAT'S BEING
SCHEDULED FOR JUNE.
BUT MARSHAWN WARDEN AND TRAVER
HAVE KICKED OFF THEIR
ENGAGEMENT HAVE THEIR PETITION
ENGAGEMENT.
SO ALL THOSE FIRST MEETINGS ARE
COMING UP.
MARSHAWN IS TOMORROW NIGHT.
WARDEN IS APRIL 3RD AND
TRAGER'S APRIL 4TH, THE ANNUAL
SNAPSHOT.
I WANT TO SEE IF THIS WILL DOES
THIS DOES THIS DRAG OVER OR IS
IT SHOWING THE SCREEN?
>> OK, THANK YOU.
FIRST OF ALL, I DON'T KNOW THE
LINK ACTUALLY WORKED IN THE PDF
SOMETIMES OUR PROGRAMS WHEN WE
CONVERT A WORD DOCUMENT OVER TO
PDF THE HYPERLINK GETS BROKEN.
SO IF THE HYPERLINK IS NOT
WORKING LET ME KNOW AND WE CAN
SEND THAT OUT THROUGH A
SEPARATE LINK.
BUT THE SNAPSHOT YOU'VE SEEN A
VERSION OF THIS LAST YEAR.
WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO
UPDATE THIS.
I'M JUST GOING TO QUICKLY
SCROLL THROUGH IT AND IF YOU
WANT A MORE IN-DEPTH DOVE ON
THIS IN THE FUTURE WE CAN COME
BACK.
BUT AGAIN, THE IDEA IS TO
REALLY START REPORTING OUT ON A
REGULAR BASIS, ON AN ANNUAL
BASIS ON THE ACCOMPLISHMENTS
RELATED TO THE TRANSPORTATION
PLAN.
SO AGAIN, WE'RE SHOWING THE
CRASH TRENDS.
WE REPORT OUT ON THE SEPARATELY
.
OBVIOUSLY THIS IS IMPORTANT TO
VISION ZERO.
SO WE WANT TO MAKE SURE WE
CONTINUE TO DISPLAY THIS
INFORMATION.
WE ALSO KIND OF SHOW HOW MANY
OF THESE CRASHES INVOLVING
VULNERABLE ROAD USERS.
SOME OF THESE GRAPHICS ARE ALL
TO LOAD MY TWO
I JUST OK, THERE
IT IS NOW LOADED JUST TALKS
ABOUT PRETTY MUCH FIFTY PERCENT
OF THE SERIOUS CRASHES DID
INVOLVE VULNERABLE ROAD USERS.
SO THAT'S DEFINITELY SOMETHING
WE NEED TO BE CONTINUING TO
MAKE PROGRESS ON AND WE ARE
MINDFUL OF IT.
>> THE TWENTY TWENTY THREE
ACHIEVEMENTS SOME OF THEM WE
WANTED TO KIND OF TALK ABOUT
THE COUNCIL SPONSORED
ELECTIONS.
WE WANT TO TALK ABOUT THE GRANT
AWARDS, THE TECHNOLOGY AND
INNOVATIONS THAT ARE HAPPENING
AND THEN ALSO THE
ELECTRIFICATION.
AND SO JUST REALLY MENTIONING
SOME OF THOSE THINGS THAT
HAPPENED IN THOSE CASES WHEN
YOU GET DOWN INTO THE MAIN
FUNCTION AND WE'VE KIND OF ALL
OF THESE FACILITIES THAT WERE
INSTALLED, WE DO HAVE SOME CALL
BUT I KIND OF YOU KNOW,
SUMMARIZE THAT ONE HUNDRED ONE
POINT THIRTY NINE MILES
OF SIDEWALKS WERE FILLED WITH
THIRTEEN INSTALLED AND TWO NEW
ACCESSIBLE SERVICE ACTIVATED
AND INSTALLED BY A NETWORK
TWELVE POINT ONE MILES
OF FACILITIES THAT WERE BUILT
OR UPGRADED.
INTERSECTIONS WERE APPROVED
LAST YEAR WE LAUNCHED THE
PARKING PILOT AND IDENTIFIED
THOSE LOCATIONS WE TALK ABOUT
THE TRAFFIC CALMING PETITIONS
THAT WERE PROCESSED LAST YEAR
AND WHICH ONES WERE INSTALLED
AND YEAH AND THEN AFTER YOU GET
THROUGH THOSE MAPPING EXERCISES
AND YOU CAN GO THROUGH AND KIND
OF CLICK ON DIFFERENT THINGS AS
WELL, IT'S KIND OF A NIFTY
LITTLE FEATURE INTERACTIVE.
THEN WE GET INTO PROJECT
SPOTLIGHTS WHICH AGAIN REALLY
JUST KIND OF CALL OUT SOME
OF THE IMPORTANT PROJECTS THAT
HAPPENED LAST YEAR.
SO WE FOCUS ON STATE STREET HAS
A NICE PICTURE, HAS A LITTLE
BRIEF DESCRIPTION ABOUT WHAT
THE PROJECT INCLUDED.
TALK ABOUT CHURCH ROAD.
WE TALK ABOUT THE VISION STREET
EXTENSION, THE CYCLE TRACK.
WE TALK ABOUT THE FLAT ROAD
PROJECT AND THE CLICK BUILD
PROJECTS THAT WE'RE IMPLEMENTED
DOWNTOWN.
THEN WE ALSO REACHED OUT TO OUR
PARTNER AGENCIES AND ASKED FOR
UPDATES AS WELL.
SO THE DDA AND THE ANN ARBOR
TRANSPORTATION AUTHORITY GAVE
US SOME OF THOSE.
SO YOU KNOW THE DDA AND THEIR
BIKE COUNTERS ON THE WAY TO
SOME OF THE RECONFIGURATIONS
AND WORKING WITH THEM TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE CAN CONTINUE TO
ACCOMMODATE TRANSIT AS WELL AND
ALSO KIND OF TRY TO BUILD OUT
SOME OF THE THINGS THAT DON'T
FIT GREAT INTO OTHER BOXES.
SO YOU KNOW, HOW MANY OF THESE
MEETINGS DO WE HAVE?
HOW MANY OTHER PROFESSIONAL
ASSOCIATION DO WE PARTICIPATE
IN?
WHERE ARE WE GIVING
PRESENTATIONS TO REALLY SPREAD
THE WORD ABOUT, YOU KNOW, SOME
OF THIS IMPORTANT WORK
EDUCATION ENCOURAGEMENT AND
SOME OF THE THINGS WE CAN DO TO
HELP ENCOURAGE THROUGH COMMUTER
CHALLENGES AND OTHER THINGS IN
THAT SPACE MICRO MOBILITY
SPEAKING SPECIFICALLY TO SPIN E
SCOOTERS AND BIKES SO JUST KIND
OF SHOWING HOW MANY TOTAL MILES
WERE DONE, HOW MANY TRIPS WERE
MADE BY SCOOTER AND BY BIKE
RESPECTIVELY AND WHAT THE
AVERAGE TRIP DISTANCES AND THEN
JUST KIND OF CAPTURING SOME
OF THE CONVERSATIONS WE'VE
HEARD FROM SOME RESIDENTS THAT
ARE SUPPORTIVE OF THIS WORK.
>> SO SO AGAIN, I KNOW WAS A
VERY QUICK KIND OF FLY BY ON
WHAT THIS SINGLE SNAPSHOT IS
BUT HOPEFULLY IT GIVES YOU AN
APPRECIATION FOR SOME OF THE
THINGS THAT WERE ACCOMPLISHED
LAST YEAR.
AND AGAIN, IF YOU WANT A DEEPER
DOVE AT A FUTURE TIME, HAPPY TO
COME BACK AND MAYBE BRING
SUZANNE WHO WAS THE PRIMARY
AUTHOR ON THIS GIVE HER AN
OPPORTUNITY TO TO TALK MORE
ABOUT IT.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THANKS VERY.
LET'S MOVE ON TO LIAISON
REPORTS AND COMMISSIONERS'
SUBMISSIVELY IS ON TO ANOTHER
BODY OR ORGANIZATION IF YOU
HAVE A QUICK REPORT YOU'D LIKE
TO PROVIDE THE TIME
.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SEEING THEM COMMISSION MEMBER
COMMUNICATIONS THIS TIME ALL
COMMISSIONERS ARE INVITED TO
PROVIDE ANY REPORTS OR UPDATES
IF THEY'D LIKE ERIKA JUST WANT
TO SHARE THAT COUNCIL'S MEETING
ON MONDAY WE DID PASS A
RESOLUTION THAT WAS SUPPORTIVE
OF COUGHER SORT OF A TRANSIT
ANALYSIS FOR THE US.
TWENTY THREE CORRIDOR SO THAT
PASSED UNANIMOUSLY SUPPORTING
THE REDS EFFORTS TO ADD THAT TO
THE ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS
THAT'S HAPPENING ON US.
>> TWENTY THREE THANK YOU NOTES
RIGHT HERE FOR FUTURE AGENDA
ITEMS.
AS ALWAYS, PLEASE SEND A NOTE
OR SOMEHOW MESSAGE MYSELF OR
RAYMOND OR MEGGAN.
WE ALWAYS LIKE TO GET IDEAS FOR
FUTURE AGENDA TOPICS.
SOME MAY HAVE COME OUT FROM
TODAY'S MEETING ACTUALLY.
ALL RIGHT.
SO WITH THAT THE NEXT MEETING
LET'S THE SO OF SOME PREVIOUSLY
REQUESTED AGENDA ITEMS THAT WE
MIGHT EXPECT IN THE NEAR FUTURE
INCLUDE FISCAL YEAR TWENTY FIVE
BUDGET A GET DOWNTOWN PROGRAM
UPDATE CRASH RESPONSE PROTOCOL
DISCUSSION TWENTY THREE TWENTY
FOURTH SEASON THEN REVIEW FOR
WINTER MAINTENANCE AND YEAH ANY
OTHER NEW TOPICS THAT COME IN.
ALL RIGHT NEXT MEETING WILL BE
HELD ON WEDNESDAY APRIL 17TH AT
SEVEN PM.
THIS WILL ALSO BE A VIRTUAL
MEETING LIKE THIS ONE AND IF
THERE ARE NO OBJECTIONS WE WILL
ADJOURN THIS MARCH 20TH TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR MEETING SEEING NO
OBJECTIONS.
>> THIS MEETING IS ADJOURNED.
>> EVERYBODY HAVE A GOOD NIGHT